Strategic
Risk Analysis
2022
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
Plac Europejski 6, 00-844 Warsaw, Poland  
T +48 22 205 95 00 
F +48 22 205 95 01 
frontex@frontex.europa.eu 
www.frontex.europa.eu 
Warsaw, July 2022 
Risk Analysis Unit 
Frontex reference number: SAMD/RAU/SFALEM/7782/2022 
FPI 22.5042
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Frontex would like to thank all Member State experts who participated in workshops, shared their insights
and contributed to the preparation of this report. Their input on particular themes of interest, especially threats 
of a hybrid nature, and scenario development, is hereby acknowledged with gratitude. Also, we would like to 
thank JRC for their support in the methodological part and the scenario development chapter and Europol 
for their valuable contribution to the section on cybercrime.
Paper version: 
TT-09-22-275-EN-C 
ISBN 978-92-9467-430-2 
doi: 10.2819/618977
PDF version: 
TT-09-22-275-EN-N 
ISBN 978-92-9467-431-9 
doi: 10.2819/76165
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
Table of contents
Foreword by the Executive Director 2
Executive summary 3
1. Introduction 5
2. The impact of megatrends on EIBM 6
2.1. Security paradigm 6
2.2. Increasing influence of international governance organisations and systems 8
2.3. Climate change 9
2.4. Demographic imbalances 10
2.5. Shifting health challenges 11
2.6. Widening inequalities 12
3. Migration and Returns 14
3.1. Migration 14
3.2. Returns 16
4. Cross-border crime 19
5. Terrorism 25
6. Hybrid Threats 27
7. Future scenarios for EIBM 29
7.1. Baseline scenario 29
7.2. Best–case scenario 31
7.3. Worst–case scenario 33
7.4. Security scenario 35
8. Conclusions and Recommendations 38
ANNEX – Methodological Note 39
Endnotes 40
2 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
Recent months have seen monumen-
tal events and challenges that have af-
fected the safety and wellbeing of all 
Europeans and will transform the en-
tire picture of EU border and migration 
management for many years to come. 
From COVID-19 to the instrumentali-
sation of migration, to the invasion of 
Ukraine, which has brought millions of 
refugees streaming across our borders – 
all these events have changed our lives, 
making crisis management a permanent 
feature of EU border management.
The shifting world is also highlighting 
the importance of trustworthy forecast-
ing and strategic risk analysis for policy-
makers and strategic planners at the EU 
and national levels. Reliable and proven 
analysis is invaluable to understanding 
these changes as they ripple through the 
many facets of European Integrated Bor-
der Management (EIBM) – from migra-
tion to cross-border crime to terrorist and 
hybrid threats.
For these reasons I am proud to pre-
sent the Strategic Risk Analysis 2022 
prepared by the analysts at Frontex, the 
European Border and Coast Guard Agency, 
in cooperation with our many stakehold-
ers. This document provides strategic 
foresight to identify threats, challenges 
and opportunities in the field of EU bor-
der management and return over a 10-
year horizon. SRA 2022 focusses on six 
megatrends that have the greatest im-
pact on the EIBM and its components, 
and offers alternative future scenarios to 
facilitate strategic conversations at both 
EU and national levels.
It is an ambitious exercise that aims 
to provide long-term foresight and future 
scenarios for effective policymaking, stra-
tegic decision-making and capability de-
velopment planning in a turbulent global 
environment.
The unprecedented challenges for 
EIBM also spotlight the role Frontex will 
play over the coming years. The Agency 
will continue to provide a comprehensive 
picture of what is happening at our exter-
nal borders and help Member States to se-
cure them, while protecting fundamental 
rights that will be increasingly challenged 
by the global trends. The reinforced Fron-
tex, with the strong operational back-
bone of the European Border and Coast 
Guard Standing Corps, stands ready to an-
swer the many challenges of our chang-
ing world.
Foreword by the Executive Director
Aija Kalnaja
Executive Director a.i
3 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
Executive summary
The SRA 2022 provides foresight on 
how megatrends and possible future 
events will develop and affect EU border 
and migration management between 
now and 2032.
The EU has faced several crises in quick 
succession over the past two years (i.e., 
the instrumentalisation of migration by 
certain third countries, COVID-19, Rus-
sia’s war on Ukraine and the associated 
refugee crisis). These events will have 
long-lasting effects that will be experi-
enced between now and 2032, making 
crisis management a permanent fea-
ture of EU border management.
The war in Ukraine has further 
fuelled geopolitical competition and is 
driving humankind in the direction of 
a hostile multipolar world. Its effects will 
be experienced throughout this decade 
through military conflicts, hybrid war-
fare and/or other actions short of war. 
Many countries will try to increase their 
strategic autonomy and serve their stra-
tegic interests through balance of power 
politics. Existing or new political, secu-
rity and economic alliances will antago-
nise rival countries or blocs of countries. 
The geopolitical environment will influ-
ence all megatrends including interna-
tional cooperation on issues of major 
importance (e.g., sustainable develop-
ment goals).
In the next decade, EU border man-
agement will experience a higher oc-
currence of migration/refugee crises 
(or disproportionate pressures) that will 
test the effectiveness of border controls. 
The complex interplay of geopolitics, se-
curity conflicts, and other megatrends 
will influence different regions of the 
world, including countries in close prox-
imity to Europe. The EU may encoun-
ter ‘migration blackmail’ attempts by 
neighbouring third countries that in-
strumentalise migrant and refugee flows 
for political purposes. In this context, re-
turns will be a key capability of European 
Integrated Border Management (EIBM) as 
migration management depends heavily 
– beside establishing legal pathways and 
integration - on effective returns carried 
out in a fast, orderly, humane and digni-
fied manner. Efficient cooperation with 
third countries in the EU neighbourhood, 
the Middle East, Asia and Africa will be 
crucial, too.
Cross-border crime (CBC) activi-
ties will evolve and further affect Eu-
rope, as it is a major market for illicit 
goods. Criminal networks will demon-
strate their ability to exploit any oppor-
tunities both domestically and beyond 
national borders. Criminals will use mod-
ern technologies and new modi operandi to 
achieve their objectives and avoid detec-
tion. The deteriorating security situation 
on the EU’s eastern borders with Bela-
rus and Ukraine will have negative con-
sequences. Trafficking in human beings 
and smuggling activities (e.g., weapons, 
explosives and ammunition, narcotics) 
will most likely increasingly affect the EU 
borders. Other well-known threats (e.g., 
cocaine and heroin smuggling) will em-
anate from complex international routes 
and the exploitation of shipping con-
tainer transportation.
Terrorist threats will be ever-pre-
sent in Europe as hostile geopolitics, con-
flicts and instability will contribute to the 
spread of extremist ideas and radicalisa-
tion. Modern technologies will serve as 
key enablers of terrorism. Terrorist groups 
might use migration flows to cross into 
Europe and recruit new members from 
among international migrants. EU bor-
der authorities will play an increasingly 
important role in the fight against terror-
ism in Europe through timely sharing of 
information, early detection and warning, 
and operational responses. The Schen-
gen Information System (SIS), the Entry/
Exit System (EES), the European Travel 
Information and Authorisation System 
(ETIAS), and the interoperability of EU 
information systems, will strengthen 
EU border security and counter-terror-
ism efforts.
Hybrid threats (i.e., hybrid influenc-
ing, interference, and warfare) will be 
characterised by higher frequency, so-
phistication and impact, involving state 
and non-state actors adapted to the hos-
tile security environment. These actors 
might exploit legal and operational 
vulnerabilities – such as cyberattacks 
against border infrastructure, artificial 
creation of migratory routes or weap-
ons smuggling for terrorist purposes – 
to harm the EU’s external and internal 
security. Hybrid actors might use ‘wedge’ 
strategies1 to hinder EU operational re-
sponses at the external borders. By tar-
geting the humanitarian and human 
rights dimension (‘lawfare’) they will 
try to destabilise the EU, divide polit-
ical and public opinion, and harm the 
EU’s reputation. Hence, a coordinated 
EU response is essential to protect both 
the EU borders and fundamental rights 
(i.e., contingency planning, training, 
crisis preparedness, capability develop-
ment and deployment of EBCG Stand-
ing Corps).
In the next decade fundamental 
rights – and international human rights 
more globally – will be increasingly chal-
lenged by the global trends. Currently, it 
is possible to observe that when Member 
States are confronted with increased mi-
gratory pressure, they may take measures 
4 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
which are inconsistent with the EU and 
international legal framework on funda-
mental rights. In order to avoid widen-
ing gaps within the EU, EIBM will need 
to renew its commitment to the respect 
of EU and international law.
This report presents four alterna-
tive scenarios for consideration by pol-
icymakers and strategic planners at EU 
and national level. The geopolitical and 
security megatrend will influence all 
scenarios in many ways: a hostile secu-
rity environment that poses major chal-
lenges for EIBM (worst-case scenario); 
a stabilised security environment that 
significantly reduces pressures and chal-
lenges at the EU’s external borders (best-
case scenario); the projection of current 
security threats into the future (baseline 
scenario); and key security factors and 
thematic phenomena of interest to EIBM, 
such as instrumentalisation of migration, 
cross-border crime, respect of fundamen-
tal rights (security scenario).
Significant threats and challenges 
will be faced in the next decade requir-
ing strategic adjustments, ‘externalisa-
tion’ of EU border management in third 
countries through trusting cooperation 
and comprehensive operational responses 
to improve the effectiveness and crisis 
preparedness of EIBM. Consistent pol-
icy implementation and further devel-
opment of the 15 IBM components will 
allow for effective management of ex-
isting, emerging or unforeseen threats. 
The war in Ukraine and the emergence of 
a hostile security environment should be 
closely monitored and assessed because 
it will have serious geopolitical, security, 
and socio-economic implications on EU 
border management too.
5 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
1. Introduction
Every two years Frontex prepares 
a Strategic Risk Analysis (SRA) for Eu-
ropean Integrated Border Management 
(EIBM) in close cooperation with EU 
Member States. The SRA is submitted to 
the European Parliament, the Council and 
the European Commission, as stipulated 
in the EBCG Regulation (art.29 EBCG).
The SRA is a strategic foresight report 
that aims at identifying threats, chal-
lenges and opportunities in the area of 
EU border management and returns over 
a 10-year horizon. It has an extensive 
scope, assessing megatrends, their in-
terplay, and their effects on the thematic 
areas of interest (e.g., migration, cross-
border crime, terrorism). The assessment 
covers all relevant IBM dimensions in line 
with the legal framework of the EBCG 
2.0 and juxtaposes the findings of meg-
atrend analysis with existing and emerg-
ing security issues at the EU’s external 
borders to anticipate possible future de-
velopments. It is an ambitious exercise in 
futures thinking which aims to provide 
long-term foresight and future scenar-
ios for effective policymaking, strategic 
decision-making, and capability devel-
opment planning in a turbulent global 
environment.
The establishment of EIBM is stipu-
lated in the EBCG Regulation. The Euro-
pean Border and Coast Guard implements 
IBM as a  shared responsibility of the 
Agency and all national authorities re-
sponsible for border management (art.7 
EBCG). Effective management of the ex-
ternal borders is of crucial importance for 
the EU, and specifically, for the protection 
of Schengen as an area of freedom, secu-
rity and justice. External border security 
shields the EU from various threats and 
ensures a high level of internal security 
within the Union. Irregular migration, 
cross-border crime, terrorism, and any 
future threats must be managed at the 
external borders in full respect of funda-
mental rights and criminal law – con-
sistent with national and international 
legislation as appropriate – safeguarding 
the abolition of internal borders and the 
right of free movement within the EU.
In total, EIBM consists of 15 compo-
nents of which fundamental rights, ed-
ucation and training, and research and 
innovation are overarching components 
for its implementation (art.3 EBCG). The 
effectiveness of EIBM is ensured by the 
European Commission and EBCG through 
the ‘Multiannual strategic policy cycle 
for European integrated border manage-
ment’ (art.8 EBCG). To further promote 
and support this integrated process, EBCG 
also establishes a  ‘technical and oper-
ational strategy for European IBM’ (TO 
strategy EIBM).
In the SRA 2020, the assessment of 
megatrends concluded that migratory 
and crime patterns in the European Un-
ion will be greatly affected over the next 
decade by environmental, health, soci-
oeconomic, political and technological 
developments, and related challenges.
The Commission prepared the policy 
document developing a multiannual stra-
tegic policy for EIBM in accordance with 
Article 8(4) of the EBCG Regulation, which 
was published in May 2022, based on the 
SRA 2020. The policy document acknowl-
edges that the challenges identified in 
the SRA 2020 have been confirmed and 
complemented by events that have taken 
place since, such as the situation on the 
EU-Belarus border, which demonstrated 
how instrumentalisation of migration 
can create a hybrid threat, and the Rus-
sian invasion of Ukraine, which led to an 
unprecedented number of people flee-
ing to the EU.
The SRA 2022 report provides an up-
date on how these global forces are ex-
pected to shape worldwide developments 
and impact EU border and migration 
management. From the overall 14 meg-
atrends2, in consultation with all stake-
holders, six megatrends were chosen for 
SRA 2022 purposes as having the high-
est impact on EIBM and its components: 
security, demographics, climate change, 
inequalities, health challenges, and gov-
ernance systems. The SRA 2022 also offers 
alternative future scenarios to facilitate 
strategic conversations at the EU and na-
tional level.
The SRA 2022 is the outcome of a sys-
tematic joint effort by Frontex and its EU 
partners, which made insightful con-
tributions and assisted in steering the 
work in the right direction. The strate-
gic foresight process benefited signifi-
cantly from a collaborative approach and 
modern practices in strategic planning.
This report first examines the impact 
of megatrends and their interplay and 
then looks into thematic areas relevant 
to Frontex’s mandate, namely Migra-
tion and Returns, Terrorism, Cross-bor-
der crime and Hybrid threats to identify 
the core threats and challenges for EIBM. 
After that, it provides four future sce-
narios identifying both challenging and 
less challenging developments for Fron-
tex and the EU in general. The conclud-
ing chapter provides an outlook with key 
findings for consideration.
6 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
2. The impact of megatrends on EIBM
2.1. Security paradigm
The security paradigm, a  megatrend 
which has changed tremendously in 
2022, relates to the changing global se-
curity environment and the associated 
challenges for EU border management. 
External border security is affected by 
phenomena such as geopolitics, migra-
tion, cross-border crime, terrorism, and 
hybrid threats that are fluid and multi-
dimensional in nature, thus requiring 
a flexible approach to their understand-
ing, analysis and management.
Major geopolitical shifts3 and in-
tense competition among nation states 
have created new conflict zones around 
the world (e.g., the Russian invasion in 
Ukraine, sovereignty disputes, conflicts 
over energy, scarce resources and spheres 
of influence) posing serious threats to 
international peace and stability. In this 
context, new military technologies and 
the emergence of different areas of con-
frontation (e.g., Ukraine, Taiwan, South 
China Sea [Spratly Islands], East China 
Sea [Senkaku Islands], Arctic, Space) have 
changed the global security landscape 
profoundly. Modern warfare has become 
more sophisticated with new lethal weap-
ons (e.g., hypersonic missiles, unmanned 
aerial drones) which will transform mil-
itary capabilities and future battlefields. 
A key risk indicator of the changing se-
curity and defence environment is ‘world 
military expenditure’, which passed USD 
2 trillion for the first-time last year.4 Rus-
sia’s war on Ukraine, and the strong sup-
port for Ukraine from NATO countries, 
risks not only a new arms race, but also 
increases the possibility of catastrophic 
nuclear war. This major conflict and its 
side-effects (e.g., refugee crisis, economic 
sanctions, food crisis, high energy prices) 
will have far-reaching consequences for 
the international order; most likely lead-
ing to a more hostile multipolar world.
Dynamic forms of cross-border crime and 
terrorism will remain key threats
EU border management faces both 
existing and emerging security threats 
from cross-border crime and terrorism, 
including the criminal-terrorist nexus. 
These threats are evolving dynamically. 
For example, information from Frontex 
debriefing activities indicates how the 
criminal economy intersects with mili-
tant and terrorist groups’ economic and 
political ambitions. Their portfolio in-
cludes various types of illegal smuggling 
(e.g., drugs, weapons, tobacco, natural re-
sources), money laundering, trafficking in 
human beings, and smuggling of irregu-
lar migrants to the EU, as demonstrated 
by the involvement of jihadist groups in 
Syria. At the EU’s external borders, two 
types of terrorist threats are identified: 
(i) known individuals such as Foreign 
Terrorist Fighters (FTFs) included in da-
tabases that should be checked during 
border controls; and (ii) unknown high-
risk individuals (not necessary linked to 
any terrorist groups) who may still pose 
a major challenge for the internal and 
external security of the Union.
On the other hand, international crim-
inal markets and transnational crimes 
typically exploit lucrative business oppor-
tunities across the spectrum of human 
activity. Well-known, high-risk crimes 
such as narcotics and contraband smug-
gling will continue to increase despite 
enforcement actions.5 While the pan-
demic brought about a measurable drop 
in urban crimes due to stay-at-home re-
strictions6, it also caused a displacement 
of illicit activities to the internet, result-
ing in a surge of online crimes7.
As regards the interplay with other meg-
atrends, the security megatrend is linked 
directly and indirectly to almost all other 
megatrends. This deserves in-depth anal-
ysis to identify the complex nature of 
these relationships, but that goes beyond 
the scope of this assessment. It is obvi-
ous, however, that migration, cross-bor-
der crime, terrorism and hybrid threats 
represent key dimensions of the secu-
rity megatrend that interact with, and 
are themselves affected by social, po-
litical, economic, technological, legal, 
governance, demographic, consumer-
ist, urbanisation, and other major trends 
worldwide. The emergence of a multipolar 
world characterised by intense competi-
tion between nation states and different 
alliances, indicates the primacy of geo-
political considerations from now on. Se-
curity threats will therefore proliferate 
in the next 10 years due to the combined 
effects of the hostile geopolitical climate 
and all other megatrends.
Human mobility will continue to be 
affected by geopolitics, geoeconomics, re-
gional and domestic conflicts, wars, natu-
ral and human-induced disasters, climate 
change, environmental degradation, so-
cial inequalities, health challenges, edu-
cational challenges, changes in the nature 
of work, urbanisation trends, and demo-
graphic imbalances. These factors will 
influence population movements domes-
tically and internationally. According to 
the Internal Displacement Monitoring 
Centre (IDMC), for example, around the 
globe over 40 million new internal dis-
placements – 9.8 million caused by con-
flict and violence and 30.7 million caused 
by natural disasters – were recorded in 
2020.8 At the time of writing, the war in 
Ukraine has already forced six million 
Ukrainians to flee their country and many 
more millions have been displaced within 
7 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
Ukraine.9 Hence, complex causal mecha-
nisms involving several megatrends and 
their interplay will be driving domes-
tic and international migration over 
the next decade.
Among other influencing factors, 
technological progress and hypercon-
nectivity will facilitate and create am-
ple opportunities for illegal smuggling 
(e.g., drugs, weapons, commodities, nat-
ural resources) and trafficking in human 
beings for sexual and economic exploi-
tation. Due to technological advances, 
criminal and terrorist organisations have 
been rapidly adapting to the highly in-
terconnected and borderless global en-
vironment, adjusting their business 
models and organisational and opera-
tional posture accordingly. Their dynamic 
adaptation also stems from a constant 
interaction with global trends pertain-
ing to the economy, technology, social 
inequalities, political mobilisation, ac-
tivism and violence, or human mobility 
across national borders.
In recent years, the terrorist focus has 
steadily shifted from the Middle East to 
the Sahel region. Al-Qaeda and ISIS affil-
iates have exploited the security and po-
litical vacuum to improve recruitment, 
hone their capabilities, and project power 
in the Sahel. While violence has so far re-
mained local, the strategic objectives of 
terrorist groups may include future at-
tacks in the EU by operatives infiltrat-
ing into migratory flows, for instance.
Impact on EIBM
Geopolitical conflicts and the exploitation 
of irregular migration will continue to shape 
EIBM in an increasingly hostile multipolar 
landscape
The evolution of the security meg-
atrend – in particular, geopolitical devel-
opments and military conflicts – will have 
a profound effect on other megatrends 
in the next decade. Hostile geopolitics 
will significantly influence interna-
tional relations between nation-states 
and blocs of countries. The EU will find 
itself in an antagonistic relationship with 
various third countries, which will af-
fect EU border management, creating 
new threats and operational challenges. 
In other words, third countries through 
their actions (or failures to act) will in-
crease the risks of migration, cross-bor-
der crime, terrorism, and hybrid threats 
in an attempt to exert pressure and se-
cure concessions from the EU.
A hostile multipolar world will likely 
transform the megatrends landscape af-
fecting, among other things, EU border 
security. The exploitation of irregular mi-
gration – among other geopolitical/eco-
nomic factors – will continue to be used 
by neighbouring third countries as a pri-
mary political tool for exerting political 
and economic influence on the EU. Re-
cent developments at the EU’s eastern 
and southern external borders showed 
clearly how migration can be instrumen-
talised for political purposes. Besides that, 
Russia’s war on Ukraine, the economic 
sanctions against Russia, and the mas-
sive refugee flows into the EU represent 
some of the ‘costs of war’10 that will have 
long-term security consequences for the 
EU. Instability at the EU’s eastern bor-
ders and the emergence of any new con-
flicts might test EU border management 
repeatedly. Border porosity will remain 
a major issue for the EU as well as for 
many third countries in terms of exer-
cising effective control over large por-
tions of their territories (e.g., detecting 
people movements, cross-border crime 
and terrorist activities across borders). 
The increased militarisation of the EU’s 
external border due to the proximity to 
conflict zones as well as in response to 
future hybrid threats will be one of the 
key considerations for EU border man-
agement over the next decade.
A defining feature of the security meg-
atrend with serious implications for law 
enforcement, counterterrorism and bor-
der management authorities will be the 
availability of numerous crime and 
terrorism enablers, such as: Internet 
and social media, encrypted commu-
nication technologies, cyberattacks, ar-
tificial intelligence/machine learning 
technologies, money laundering, cryp-
tocurrencies, state actors, disinforma-
tion, terrorist financing, economic and 
industrial espionage, dual-use technolo-
gies, military equipment, legal business 
structures, offshore companies with ob-
scure beneficial ownership, weak gov-
ernance systems, legal vulnerabilities, 
corruption and violence. Criminal groups 
have quickly adapted their business mod-
els to use these and other enablers to ex-
pand their reach and gain higher profits. 
As a result, crime services are being of-
fered on multiplatform messaging apps 
(e.g., WhatsApp, Telegram, Facebook). Ter-
rorist groups, such as Al-Qaeda and ISIS, 
distribute globally vast amounts of ideo-
logical and propaganda material through 
social media platforms.11 Advanced tech-
nologies at the disposal of criminal and 
terrorist groups will also increase the 
risks to EU-based organisations, commu-
nities, and infrastructures. Cybercrim-
inals, for example, could target public 
services and critical infrastructures ex-
ploiting any vulnerabilities (e.g., large 
IT systems, databases, data centres, in-
formation exchange systems). Their ac-
tions could seriously impair the capacity 
of the targeted organisations to main-
tain business continuity inflicting great 
societal and economic harm. Terror-
ists, using military grade weaponry ac-
quired, for example, from the war zone 
in Ukraine, could launch indiscriminate 
attacks against the civilian population 
or high value/symbolic targets in the EU. 
EU border authorities, infrastructure and 
personnel could also be targeted by crim-
inals and terrorists alike.
Consequently, situational awareness, 
risk/intelligence analysis, national and 
international cooperation, information 
exchange among all relevant authorities, 
contingency planning and crisis manage-
ment will continue to be of paramount 
importance to better understand, detect 
and respond to these threats effectively.
8 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
2.2. Increasing influence of 
international governance 
organisations and systems
The global political landscape is marked by the 
increasing appearance of various non-state 
organisations, institutions and systems, and 
international cooperation is essential to deal 
with common global issues
In the 21st century, there has been 
a proliferation of regional and interna-
tional governance systems and organisa-
tions across the spectrum of megatrends. 
Collective action on many fronts is ena-
bled through various international or-
ganisations (e.g., United Nations, World 
Health Organisation, NATO) and systems 
of political and diplomatic relations and 
international law. Besides intergovern-
mental organisations (IGOs), the global 
political landscape has opened up to a va-
riety of non-state actors, such as interna-
tional non-governmental organisations 
(INGOs) and civil society groups, multi-
national corporations (MNCs), epistemic 
communities, social movements and even 
private individuals. These actors assume 
a more influential role in international 
affairs by progressively taking on the 
work traditionally reserved for govern-
ments; that is, enforcing new governance 
schemes, setting norms and standards, 
as well as implementing and monitor-
ing activities.
Global governance, however, is fraught 
with concerns over legitimacy, accounta-
bility, representativeness, inclusiveness, 
geopolitical/economic effects, the tension 
between political and epistemic author-
ity (technocracy), and its effectiveness. 
Without substantial improvement in in-
ternational relations and cooperation, 
the delivery of global public goods will be 
negatively affected over the next 10 years. 
Moreover, the attainment of sustaina-
ble development goals (SDG) will not be 
achieved through the efforts of individual 
countries alone, as it depends heavily on 
effective systems of multilateral govern-
ance and coordinated policy responses.
As regards the interplay with other 
megatrends, governance systems are 
directly or indirectly linked with all 
megatrends. International cooperation 
through governance systems, either gov-
ernmental, non-governmental or inter-
national, is essential to deal effectively 
with all megatrends. However, legiti-
macy and accountability issues as well 
as the hostile multipolar environment 
characterised by intense geopolitical/eco-
nomic competition, nationalistic inter-
ests and armed conflicts, such as the war 
in Ukraine, present major obstacles to 
peaceful co-existence, stability, and de-
velopment. Obviously, the different and 
sometimes conflicting governance sys-
tems in the world and the weakened role 
of the UN cannot resolve issues of ma-
jor importance and contain the spread 
of insecurity.
Impact on EIBM
EU border authorities will face significant 
security challenges due to the ineffectiveness 
of international, regional, and other types of 
governance systems inside a hostile multipolar 
world. The weak governance systems of less 
developed countries will compound the overall 
problem of governance
Enhanced awareness of the situation 
in third countries and neighbouring third 
countries (i.e., the first and second tiers of 
the 4-tier access model of EIBM) should 
be continuously provided via the liaison 
network, EU delegations and other po-
litical, diplomatic and operational chan-
nels/tools in order to anticipate major 
developments and assess their possi-
ble impact on EU border security. Pre-
frontier early warning and intelligence 
would be instrumental in avoiding stra-
tegic surprises that may lead to social un-
rest, regime overthrow, sectarian violence, 
armed conflicts, or refugee and human-
itarian crises. The EU most certainly has 
the possibility of further pooling its re-
sources to enhance its forecasting and 
foresight capabilities.
The political situation in third coun-
tries will always have an impact on vari-
ous thematic areas of EIBM (i.e., irregular 
migration, cross-border crime, terrorism). 
For example, sudden changes in foreign 
and migration policies of countries of or-
igin and transit (e.g., border controls, re-
admission agreements, returns) can have 
a knock-on effect on the EU’s external 
borders. It is also important to learn from 
past experience of power transitions and 
other events to be prepared for political 
changes that could have significant con-
sequences around the world and in the 
EU neighbourhood. Aggressive foreign 
policies can influence international re-
lations and the functioning of national, 
regional and international governance 
systems. Inside a highly interconnected 
and hostile multipolar world, any type 
of ties can be instrumentalised to inflict 
harm on rival countries (e.g., economic, 
technological, and cultural ties). Indi-
vidual countries or hostile coalitions of 
third countries might engage in various 
forms of hybrid interference to put polit-
ical pressure on the EU (e.g., sponsoring 
migration, facilitating the movements 
of foreign terrorist fighters, adopting an 
uncooperative stance on serious politi-
cal issues, or blackmailing in relation to 
the provision of energy or other scarce re-
sources). Besides emerging issues, long-
standing disputes over energy resources, 
sovereignty claims, revisionist policies 
and zones of instability in the EU’s wider 
geopolitical neighbourhood should be 
considered by EU border management to 
enhance general/crisis preparedness and 
capability/capacity building through stra-
tegic planning and the effective manage-
ment of the 15 IBM components.
9 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
2.3. Climate change
Climate change will be one of the most 
significant defining factors for analysing 
world politics; it comes with a great variety of 
associated challenges
Climate change poses some of the most 
serious challenges for humanity. There is 
ample evidence of an increasing number 
of extreme weather events due to the pro-
found effects of human-induced climate 
change worldwide12, and the processes 
of climate change will likely accelerate 
over the next decade. Climate change will 
cause desertification, soil degradation, 
food insecurity13, melting icecaps, rising 
sea levels, and biodiversity loss across var-
ious regions, potentially triggering tip-
ping points, as shown in Figure 1 above. 
Experts have proposed different warming 
scenarios (i.e., 1°C-3°C, 3°C-5°C, and >5°C 
higher than pre-industrial levels) that all 
have serious consequences for both de-
veloped and developing nations.
Currently, the efforts of the interna-
tional community are off track in terms 
of limiting global warming well below 
2°C, which is one of the key targets of the 
landmark 2015 Paris Agreement. This un-
derscores the difficulty in achieving cli-
mate targets since the “implementation of 
the Paris Agreement requires economic and so-
cial transformation, based on the best avail-
able science”14. In this context, the EU’s 
goal is to become a climate neutral con-
tinent by 2050. An intermediate target 
is to reduce the bloc’s net emissions by 
at least 55% by 2030. The rationale be-
hind this transformative goal is reflected 
in the statement of the European Com-
mission’s Executive Vice-President for 
the European Green Deal, Frans Tim-
mermans: “This is the make-or-break decade 
in the fight against the climate and biodiversity 
crises.”15 The EU’s efforts alone will not be 
sufficient to stem the global climate cri-
sis. Nonetheless, the ambitious EU cli-
mate plans may serve as a catalyst for 
positive change, provided that the inter-
national community moves in the same 
direction. To avoid future hothouse sce-
narios, all countries of the world should 
act decisively to achieve net zero emis-
sions and control global warming (pref-
erably at 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels) 
by investing in renewable and alternative 
energy sources.
As regards the interplay with other 
megatrends, climate change will possibly 
have the greatest effects on border secu-
rity in the future. Climate change will af-
fect other megatrends in varied degrees, 
exerting socioeconomic pressures – es-
pecially on low-income countries and 
the most vulnerable and deprived com-
munities17 – and deepening structural 
inequalities around the world. The in-
creasing frequency of extreme weather 
phenomena and the resultant environ-
mental degradation, resource scarcity 
and lack of access to basic goods such 
as food and water will have a great im-
pact upon health, economies, security, 
migration and competition over limited 
resources. This situation will affect both 
developed and less-developed states, but 
especially those who do not possess the 
capacity or mechanisms to adapt and 
deal effectively with climate cascades. 
Recent studies also indicate that climate 
change could force animal migrations, 
facilitating viral transmissions to other 
species and to humans, thus triggering 
Figure 1 Global map of potential tipping cascades16
10 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
new pandemics.18 The rapid increase of 
the global population along with urban-
isation and consumerism trends consti-
tute additional factors that will intensify 
resource scarcity and environmental deg-
radation. These combined phenomena 
will cause a continuous flow of irregular 
migration through third countries of or-
igin and transit towards developed econ-
omies, especially the EU.
Impact on EIBM
The most adverse effects of global climate 
change will likely be experienced more 
intensely in the poorer and least developed 
regions of the world, which are already 
grappling with an array of socio-economic 
issues
The inability to deal with the multidi-
mensional effects of climate change, in 
combination with other megatrends, will 
eventually exacerbate the internal situa-
tion of many low-income countries and 
might provoke civil unrest, wars and cas-
cades of events related to food, water and 
energy in areas where many people de-
pend on agriculture and their ability to 
adapt is limited19. In this turbulent global 
environment, the EU will likely experi-
ence not only a significant increase in 
economic migration and asylum ap-
plications but could also see for the first 
time the impact of climate change and 
extreme weather phenomena on popula-
tion movements from the most affected 
countries. Hence, it is paramount for EU 
border management to enhance coop-
eration with specialised governmental 
agencies and NGOs involved in the man-
agement of migration or the provision 
of humanitarian assistance – especially 
those active in third countries. EU bor-
der management should have better sit-
uational awareness about climate change 
and other megatrend-related develop-
ments in third countries by including the 
environmental dimension into migra-
tion-related risk analysis and intelligence 
work. This would provide early warning 
information and help develop more accu-
rate forecasts. Contingency planning for 
EU border authorities will also need to be 
enhanced and tested regularly. Strategic 
planning and capability development of 
Frontex and Member States need to be 
adapted to meet the new technological 
surveillance requirements and technol-
ogies should be adopted in response to 
extreme weather phenomena. 
2.4. Demographic imbalances
Demographic imbalances in less developed 
areas will worsen the socioeconomic situation 
and increase push factors for migration to 
more prosperous areas of the world
Demographic imbalances will remain 
one of the defining megatrends of this 
decade. This megatrend alone will have 
the potential to exacerbate other meg-
atrends (i.e., environmental degradation, 
resource scarcity, urbanisation, inequal-
ity). If left unchecked, it will have delete-
rious effects at a global scale. According 
to the United Nations, our planet will 
be home to 8.5 billion people in 2030 (up 
from 7.7 billion people today), 9.7 billion 
in 2050 and 11 billion by 2100. But the 
growth will be uneven and take place 
at varying speeds across world regions. 
While places such as Europe, Japan, South 
Korea and Singapore will experience pop-
ulation declines, Africa will become the 
main epicentre of population growth. Be-
tween now and 2050, this region alone is 
expected to grow by half, adding another 
billion people to our planet.
The search for economic opportuni-
ties will further drive the exodus towards 
urban areas where the lack of adequate 
infrastructures can lead to a  host of 
other social problems. The effects of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, which have not yet 
been fully grasped, could further exacer-
bate economic and social instability in 
the region. In 2020, there were 87 million 
international migrants in Europe (from 
both within and outside the continent). 
This is the largest number of any world 
region. As Europe’s population ages and 
birth rates decline, the share of work-
ing-age adults will fall below 50%, likely 
leading to labour shortages across vari-
ous sectors of activity. The continent will 
thus continue to be a prime destination 
for migration, not only by the educated 
youth of the global east and south, but 
also by those fleeing poverty and con-
flict in neighbouring regions where so-
lutions to protracted problems and new 
global challenges may not keep up with 
population growth.
This megatrend will become more im-
portant over time, considering its in-
terplay with other megatrends such as 
governance systems, inequalities, cli-
mate change, environmental degrada-
tion and resource scarcity. The expected 
demographic explosion in Africa and 
south-east Asia will worsen the socioec-
onomic situation and capacities of third 
countries to cater for the basic needs of 
their populations, creating strong push 
factors for domestic, regional and inter-
national migration. Lack of action to stem 
the climate crisis will have serious ef-
fects, especially on low-income countries 
exposing their structural deficiencies. 
Climate change, along with environmen-
tal degradation and resource scarcity, 
will further weaken the governments of 
third countries, triggering social griev-
ances, dissent and calls for reform due 
to the perceived ineffectiveness of exist-
ing policies. This will likely cause a cas-
cade of events sparking various forms 
of violent and non-violent social resist-
ance. In certain countries, it could result 
in widespread social unrest reminiscent 
of the 2011 Arab Spring. Regardless of the 
outcomes of social unrest, such develop-
ments will increase instability in neigh-
bouring countries and regions, or in the 
EU neighbourhood, worsening the push 
factors for irregular migration as well as 
increasing the possibilities for migratory/
refugee crises.
11 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
Impact on EIBM
Increased migration flows are expected 
at the EU’s external borders as a result of 
demographic growth and the demographic 
imbalances observed in less developed areas 
worldwide
In the next 10-15 years, certain third 
countries and regions of the world such 
as Africa and south-east Asia will ex-
perience rapid demographic growth. In 
combination with the effects of climate 
change, health and socioeconomic fac-
tors, structural inequalities (incl. gen-
der issues) and urbanisation trends. This 
will worsen the living conditions of the 
affected populations in numerous meg-
acities and will compound push factors 
for irregular migration. This may trig-
ger intra- and inter-regional migratory 
movements to the EU and certain emerg-
ing economies, which will continue to be 
attractive destinations for economic mi-
grants and refugees.
The population flows will comprise 
not only migrants and asylum seekers 
in search of better conditions away from 
home, but also forcibly displaced persons 
currently hosted by developing nations, 
some of which are close to the EU, where 
support systems are already straining 
under enormous pressures. Simultane-
ously, high levels of emigration, espe-
cially by young and educated people, will 
further harm the economies of sending 
countries, by accentuating a brain drain 
where human capital is lost in regions 
where such loss would have the most im-
pact. The growth of irregular migration 
will result in an increase in the activi-
ties of criminal networks as a response 
to the higher demand for smuggling ser-
vices. This might also lead to an increase 
in other organised crime activities. This 
could pose serious challenges to EU bor-
der management in terms of handling 
disproportionate flows at the external 
borders, saving lives at sea and identify-
ing vulnerable groups. Therefore, inter-
national cooperation and agreements 
(e.g., readmission agreements, techni-
cal assistance, training, return activities) 
with third countries, together with de-
velopment aid are important to mitigate 
the impact of this megatrend.
2.5. Shifting health challenges
Health challenges, such as the COVID-19 
pandemic, constitute a threat that affects 
every aspect of socioeconomic life and world 
politics
The COVID-19 pandemic reignited the 
debate about the vulnerability of modern 
societies. The world has seen a number 
of major health crises in the 20th and 21st 
centuries. The outbreak and subsequent 
transmission of a novel coronavirus has 
severely tested healthcare systems, soci-
eties and economies. Besides the major 
impact on public health, the COVID-19 
crisis has also affected socioeconomic 
life worldwide. The world has been man-
aging two crises simultaneously: public 
health and the economy. To counter the 
uncontrolled life-threatening spread of 
the coronavirus, restrictions of movement 
were imposed around the globe, gradu-
ally creating smaller and smaller cells of 
free movement. The Schengen area was 
one of the first zones of free movement 
to be affected by re-introduced border 
controls, travel restrictions and the clo-
sure of borders.
The potential for criminal misuse of bi-
ological pathogens to generate new pan-
demics is a possibility that needs to be 
considered seriously, requiring improve-
ments in intelligence sharing, pandemic 
surveillance and public health systems.
As regards the interplay with other 
megatrends, pandemics pose a  sys-
temic risk, as we have experienced with 
COVID-19. Considering the increasing 
importance and far-reaching effects of 
climate change, food insecurity, grow-
ing inequalities, and rapid demographic 
growth in less developed regions of the 
world (e.g., Africa and SE Asia), it is es-
sential to reduce vaccine inequalities 
by improving access to inoculation pro-
grammes for low-income countries. Soli-
darity from developed countries towards 
less developed regions of the world is 
needed to deal with future health chal-
lenges. Moreover, health risks are directly 
linked to the security megatrend due to 
the possible misuse of biological path-
ogens by bioterrorists for political, ide-
ological or religious reasons. The wide 
scope of health challenges increases the 
gap between developed and less devel-
oped countries, as well as the threats and 
challenges to the EU’s internal and ex-
ternal border security.
Impact on EIBM
The COVID-19 pandemic illustrated both the 
vulnerability of the EU’s external borders to 
sudden health challenges and the need for 
enhancing EU border management capabilities 
to deal with such threats
External border measures play a key 
role in the protection of public health, 
as the EU’s external borders can act as 
a  filter for movements of people and 
help mitigate or suppress epidemics and 
pandemics before they spread into the 
community. Border management can 
also enable the detection of bioterrorist 
threats. The internal and external aspects 
of pandemic management require a com-
plementary approach involving preven-
tive and reactive measures at the EU’s 
external borders and in third countries. 
A coordinated EU response encompassing 
all relevant authorities, coupled with an 
early warning mechanism, will enable op-
erational and strategic responses against 
pandemic threats and other major pub-
lic health challenges. The COVID-19 pan-
demic was a wake-up call for the need to 
exercise vigilance regarding any future 
disease transmissions to human pop-
ulations, which could rapidly become 
a global threat due to the high level of 
international mobility across sea, land 
and air borders.
The EU should therefore consider ways 
to augment EU border management ca-
pabilities, including the use of the EBCG 
Standing Corps, not only to manage ex-
ternal border security, but also to protect 
the public health and economic interests 
of the EU. Specifically, this would require 
12 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
better coordination and harmonisation of 
IBM-related measures during health cri-
ses, such as best practices in cooperation 
with public health authorities, guidelines 
for implementation and monitoring of 
border closures, and adjustment of meas-
ures between different border sections.
2.6. Widening inequalities
Widening inequalities in less developed 
countries around the world in combination 
with the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic 
pose various risks of social unrest and 
destabilisation
Widening inequalities are a persistent 
global problem for humanity. Inequalities 
that do not reflect people’s inherent value, 
abilities and potential can be observed 
within and across developed and devel-
oping nations, as well as at the macro 
(international/nation-state), meso (organ-
isation/community) and micro (group/in-
dividual) level. The COVID-19 pandemic 
has exposed the structure of global vac-
cine-related inequities and their conse-
quences in both advanced economies and 
low-income countries.20 Social depriva-
tion, marginalisation and limited edu-
cational and professional opportunities 
create profound socio-economic barriers 
that are nearly impossible to overcome. 
However, it is not only these inequalities 
that are widening the gap between rich 
and poor nations, social classes and indi-
viduals. Structural inequalities represent 
a wider taxonomy of systemic and per-
sistent differences. World progress and 
sustainable development depend signif-
icantly on the closure of inequality gaps 
between countries. Hundreds of millions 
of people in Africa and Asia will be in-
creasingly affected by the worst effects 
of structural inequalities. The economic 
slowdown will increase the number of 
people living in extreme poverty (most 
people living on less than USD 1.9021 a day 
live in sub-Saharan Africa), further exac-
erbating current trends due to, among 
other factors, the effects of poor economic 
growth, climate change and the global 
demographic explosion.22 Structural ine-
qualities, therefore, represent a complex 
set of factors that will likely trigger inter-
national migration, criminality, violence, 
and armed conflict in the next decade.
Inequalities are mutually reinforced 
in complex ways by their interplay with 
other megatrends, such as security, geo-
politics, economics (e.g., higher inflation), 
demographic growth, climate change, 
technological asymmetries, urbanisation 
trends and health challenges. Inequalities 
on their own, and in combination with 
other global forces, will present extremely 
complex, resistant and challenging prob-
lems. The increasing gap between devel-
oped and less developed countries coupled 
with, for example, limited employment 
and education opportunities and uncon-
trolled urbanisation will deepen social 
and economic inequalities in low-income 
countries. Due to the multifaceted nature 
of inequalities, policy responses aimed 
at alleviating some of the most pressing 
problems in less developed countries will 
likely have limited effectiveness.
Impact on EIBM
Widening inequalities will increase push 
factors for international migration and lead to 
rising pressures at the EU’s external borders
With growing inequalities at all levels 
and increasing levels of crime, victimisa-
tion, unemployment, gender inequality, 
corruption and violence, there will be 
a great risk of social unrest and destabi-
lisation in less-developed regions of the 
world. This will require radical changes 
across different policy domains such as 
foreign policy, security, economy, em-
ployment, education and human rights, 
which low-income countries might be 
unable to implement without external 
assistance. The inequality gap between 
third countries and the affluent EU will 
likely exacerbate push and pull factors for 
migration to the latter. It may also be the 
cause of major political disagreements, 
increasing the chances of state-sponsored 
migration being used as a pressure tool 
against the EU.
The EU will face great challenges due 
to the higher numbers of economic mi-
grants, refugees, unaccompanied minors 
and families at its external borders. This 
might cause tensions between local com-
munities and migrant populations, hard-
ening the migration policies of frontline 
Member States or the EU. Preventative 
and development measures will be es-
sential in mitigating inequalities in third 
countries and hence reduce threats at the 
EU’s external border. Foreign direct in-
vestments (FDI) in third countries could 
also play an important role in mitigating 
inequalities by creating jobs and boost-
ing economic growth in the targeted 
economies.
Structural inequalities plaguing many 
countries in Africa, the Middle East and 
Asia will be one of the key drivers of in-
ternational migration, criminality, vio-
lence and armed conflict. These mounting 
threats to the EU’s external borders will 
require substantial improvements in 
general/crisis preparedness of EU bor-
der management in the next decade.
13 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
Table 1. Overview of the impact of megatrends on EIBM 
Megatrends Interplay with other megatrends Impact on EIBM Possible actions
Security paradigm  <U+25AA> Technology
 <U+25AA> Inequalities
 <U+25AA> Climate change
 <U+25AA> Environmental degradation
 <U+25AA> Resource scarcity
 <U+25AA> Migration
 <U+25AA> Hostile multipolar world
 <U+25AA> Instability in EU neighbourhood
 <U+25AA> Emergence of new conflicts and hybrid threats
 <U+25AA> Instrumentalisation of migration by third countries for 
political purposes
 <U+25AA> Use of technology and social media for online propaganda 
and radicalisation by terrorists and cybercriminals
 <U+25AA> Militarisation of EU’s external borders
 <U+25AA> National and international cooperation
 <U+25AA> Situational awareness
 <U+25AA> Risk/intelligence analysis
 <U+25AA> Information exchange among all relevant authorities to 
better understand, detect and respond to the threats to EIBM 
Migration
(due to its significance 
and high impact, this 
megatrend is not 
mentioned in chapter 2 
among the other 
megatrends but in 
chapter 3 in a dedicated 
part)
 <U+25AA> Security paradigm
 <U+25AA> Demographic imbalances
 <U+25AA> Health challenges
 <U+25AA> Inequalities
 <U+25AA> Climate change
 <U+25AA> Environmental degradation
 <U+25AA> Resource scarcity
 <U+25AA> Instrumentalisation of migration (‘migration blackmail’) 
by certain third countries for political purposes
 <U+25AA> Conflicts and strategic surprises in the Middle East and 
Asia could exacerbate push factors for migration to Europe
 <U+25AA> Interplay of megatrends in Africa could trigger massive 
migratory flows to Europe
 <U+25AA> Policy and organisational measures to enhance migration 
governance and crisis preparedness of EU border 
management
 <U+25AA> Policy coordination between European IBM and EU 
external action
 <U+25AA> Status agreements and close cooperation with third 
countries
 <U+25AA> Enhanced presence of EBCG Standing Corps in pre-frontier 
areas, and additional capacity at impacted border sections
 <U+25AA> Increased cooperation between Frontex and EUAA
Demographic imbalances  <U+25AA> Governance systems
 <U+25AA> Urbanisation
 <U+25AA> Inequalities
 <U+25AA> Climate change
 <U+25AA> Environmental degradation
 <U+25AA> Resource scarcity
 <U+25AA> Migration
 <U+25AA> Worsening socioeconomic situation in third countries
 <U+25AA> Disproportionate flows at EU external borders due to the 
status of the EU as an ideal destination
 <U+25AA> Increased criminal activities due to higher demand for 
smuggling services 
 <U+25AA> Enhanced international cooperation
 <U+25AA> Agreements with third countries (e.g., readmission 
agreements, technical assistance, training, return activities)
 <U+25AA> EU Development aid
 <U+25AA> Legal pathways for migration to Europe
Climate change  <U+25AA> Environmental degradation
 <U+25AA> Resource scarcity
 <U+25AA> Urbanisation
 <U+25AA> Growing consumption (consumerism)
 <U+25AA> Health challenges
 <U+25AA> Migration
 <U+25AA> Increased frequency of extreme weather phenomena
 <U+25AA> Social unrest and conflicts between countries related to 
food, water and energy resources
 <U+25AA> Climate-related problems in worst affected areas could 
result in domestic, regional, and international migration 
affecting Europe as well
 <U+25AA> Cooperation with governmental agencies and NGOs 
involved in migration management and humanitarian 
assistance
 <U+25AA> Better situational awareness on climate-related 
developments in third countries of origin and transit  
(e.g., using information from liaison officer network)
 <U+25AA> Green initiatives, technological adaptation, and 
sustainability focus in Frontex and Member States’ 
strategic planning and capability development 
Shifting health challenges  <U+25AA> Security paradigm
 <U+25AA> Climate change
 <U+25AA> Environmental degradation
 <U+25AA> Urbanisation
 <U+25AA> Demographic imbalances
 <U+25AA> Inequalities
 <U+25AA> Migration
 <U+25AA> Public health problems (incl. malnutrition, epidemics) 
within third countries of origin and transit exacerbate 
push factors for migration
 <U+25AA> Health-related inequalities between low-income and 
developed countries create additional push/pull factors 
for migration
 <U+25AA> Bioterrorism threat 
 <U+25AA> Preventive and reactive measures employed at the EU 
external borders and in third countries
 <U+25AA> Coordinated EU response with all relevant authorities  
(incl. a pre-warning mechanism)
 <U+25AA> Use of EBCG Standing Corps to contribute to border 
control measures relating to public health policies
Widening inequalities  <U+25AA> Demographic imbalances
 <U+25AA> Education and learning
 <U+25AA> Changing nature of work
 <U+25AA> Growing consumption
 <U+25AA> Urbanisation
 <U+25AA> Health challenges
 <U+25AA> Security paradigm
 <U+25AA> Migration
 <U+25AA> Rapid demographic growth and growing urbanisation 
trends in Africa and SE Asia
 <U+25AA> Limited employment and education opportunities 
compound push factors for migration to the EU
 <U+25AA> Better situational awareness on systemic inequalities in 
third countries of origin and transit and their effects  
(e.g., using information from liaison officer network)
 <U+25AA> Improvements in general/crisis preparedness of EU border 
management in the next decade
 <U+25AA> EU external action (e.g., promotion of legal migration,  
EU foreign aid, trade agreements, and FDI in third countries)
Governance systems  <U+25AA> Security paradigm
 <U+25AA> Climate change
 <U+25AA> Environmental degradation
 <U+25AA> Resource scarcity
 <U+25AA> Health challenges
 <U+25AA> Migration
 <U+25AA> Hostile geopolitical/security environment
 <U+25AA> Lack of international cooperation on issues of global 
importance (e.g., climate change, UN 17 sustainable 
development goals
 <U+25AA> Inability of third countries to deal with socioeconomic 
problems, climate change, security, demographic growth, 
and inequalities
 <U+25AA> Increasing number of conflicts in the EU’s neighbourhood 
and beyond
 <U+25AA> Growing migratory pressures and other security threats at 
the EU’s external borders
 <U+25AA> Direct impact on European geopolitical/security situation 
and external borders 
 <U+25AA> EIBM policy, strategic planning and capability/ capacity 
building to better prepare for a hostile geopolitical and 
security environment (e.g., armed conflicts, hybrid threats, 
CBC, terrorism, migration crisis)
 <U+25AA> Improvements in general/ and crisis preparedness of EU 
border management (incl. the 15 IBM components) over 
the next decade
14 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
3. Migration and Returns
3.1. Migration
Migration has always existed and is directly 
influenced by all megatrends in varied degrees; 
it will remain an issue of concern on the global 
and European scale
Certain factors play a  larger role in 
migration (e.g., geopolitical competition, 
wars, socioeconomic factors, demograph-
ics, environmental degradation and re-
source scarcity), while other megatrends 
influence it alongside globalisation dy-
namics that contribute to an increase in 
overall human mobility. The COVID-19 
crisis showed that public health issues 
can influence migration significantly. 
Besides global transportation disruptions 
and lockdowns that restricted human 
mobility, the public health crisis affected 
the economies of all countries. The conse-
quences of the COVID-19 pandemic (e.g., 
economic slowdown, supply chain crisis) 
will likely reverberate across the globe for 
a long time, influencing migration from 
low-income countries.
It is worth recalling the 2011 Arab 
Spring and the 2015-2016 migration cri-
sis in the Eastern Mediterranean. These 
events were major turning points for EU 
migration governance. In 2015, more than 
850 000 Syrian migrants and refugees 
moved through Turkey to Greece and then 
to other EU Member States. The defining 
characteristics of the migration crisis 
were the treacherous Aegean Sea cross-
ing that claimed many migrant lives, as 
well as the ruthless activities of crimi-
nal groups that found ways to cater for 
an extremely high demand for smug-
gling services. These events underscored 
that a major crisis could erupt in the EU 
neighbourhood and population move-
ments could reach unprecedented levels 
before being contained through special 
measures (e.g., EU Pact on Migration and 
Asylum, EU-Turkey Statement, establish-
ment of hotspot facilities on Aegean Sea 
islands, reinforcement of border-control 
activities in the Western Balkans). A re-
peat of these events is a real possibility 
in the future.
Source and transit countries for migration 
will be affected by economic challenges 
possibly triggering a new crisis for EU border 
management
Instability, security, economic chal-
lenges and various other uncertainties 
will affect source countries of migration 
in Asia, the Middle East and other coun-
tries that host large Afghan or other mi-
grant diasporas (e.g., Pakistan, Turkey, 
Iran). Pakistan itself is a key country of 
origin for legal and irregular migration 
to Europe, whereas Turkey has hosted 
millions of Syrian refugees since the civil 
war. The existence of conflict zones (Syria, 
Libya) and areas hosting high numbers 
of internally displaced persons and refu-
gees (Turkey) in relative proximity to Eu-
rope will be of particular concern in the 
foreseeable future. Long-lasting pressures 
on key host and transit countries may 
decrease their overall ability to support 
large refugee populations and migrant 
diasporas or provide them with adequate 
living standards, education and employ-
ment opportunities. This, in turn, could 
affect their relations with local popula-
tions, thus increasing push factors for 
migration to the EU.
In this turbulent environment, stra-
tegic surprises and new crises should be 
expected. In Iran, for example, the suc-
cession of Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei 
could trigger a power struggle throwing 
the country into disorder. This could have 
a domino effect: social unrest, civil war 
and massive refugee outflows that could 
reach Europe. Hence, extremely complex 
situations in third countries and in the 
EU neighbourhood will affect Europe’s 
Mediterranean borders, which will con-
tinue to be at the forefront of EU bor-
der surveillance and control operations.
The EU’s eastern borders were impacted 
recently by major events that will have long-
term consequences
Political tensions between the EU and 
Belarus heightened following the August 
2020 contested elections in Belarus, the 
May 2021 forced landing of Ryanair Flight 
4978 in Minsk to arrest a journalist, and 
the EU sanctions against Belarus that fol-
lowed. In autumn 2021, EU-Belarus rela-
tions collapsed due to Belarus’ creation 
of an artificial migration route: state in-
stitutions organised migration from the 
Middle East to Belarus with the explicit 
goal of retaliating for EU sanctions. The 
case of Belarus exemplifies third coun-
tries’ instrumentalisation of migration 
for political purposes. Apparently, cer-
tain states in the EU neighbourhood per-
ceive ‘migration blackmail’ as an effective 
method/element of a hybrid attack in-
tended to exert pressure on the EU’s ex-
ternal borders to further their geopolitical 
interests and extort concessions from 
the EU.
On 24 February 2022, Russia invaded 
Ukraine, a direct neighbour to four EU 
Member States. After three months, the 
military confrontation had forced almost 
seven million people to flee from Ukraine 
– the majority of whom sought refuge in 
the EU – creating the largest population 
displacement in the world. In response, 
15 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
the EU used the Temporary Protection Di-
rective (TPD) (Council Directive 2001/55/
EC) to provide immediate, temporary 
protection for all displaced people from 
Ukraine, demonstrating an exceptional 
degree of solidarity and coordination in 
this unprecedented situation.
Ukraine has become a conflict zone 
in an extremely serious geopolitical con-
frontation between Russia and the coun-
tries providing military and financial 
assistance to Ukraine. As the war contin-
ues, further escalation and destabilisation 
of European security, with asymmetric re-
sponses and effects in areas outside the 
conflict zone cannot be excluded. The 
number of internally displaced persons 
(estimated at 7.7 million by UNHCR) and 
Ukrainian refugees seeking protection in 
Europe increases on a daily basis. UNHCR 
estimates that another 13 million peo-
ple are currently unable to leave and are 
stranded in war-torn areas of Ukraine.
The as yet uncertain outcomes of this 
major crisis raise serious policy questions. 
For example, what might be its long-
term implications in relation to the in-
tegration of millions of Ukrainians into 
Europe? Or their return to a devastated 
Ukraine when the situation stabilises? 
The European Commission issued a Com-
munication in relation to the challenges 
of humanitarian assistance, integration, 
return, support of neighbouring coun-
tries and the protection of the EU’s ex-
ternal borders, including measures to 
avoid abuse of TPD applications.23 More-
over, Ukraine will have to bear the mas-
sive costs of reconstruction to address its 
financing gap and rebuild its destroyed 
cities and agricultural, technological, in-
dustrial and transportation infrastruc-
ture.24 To support Ukraine, the European 
Commission has outlined a reconstruc-
tion plan that is expected to last more 
than a decade, with significant financial 
assistance and mobilisation of resources 
from the EU and other international part-
ners.25 In this uncharted territory, many 
challenges remain. The current situation 
will also generate socio-economic im-
pacts sustaining push factors for migra-
tion from Ukraine long after the conflict 
subsides (According to EIU26, Ukraine’s 
GDP will not recover to pre-war levels 
for a decade). 
Many African countries will remain source 
areas for migration while they experience 
economic problems, high levels of 
unemployment, widespread poverty, social 
unrest, or political crises
The Horn of Africa also faces a variety 
of socioeconomic, environmental, secu-
rity and humanitarian challenges (from 
drought, floods, locust invasions, regional 
conflicts [Tigray region, Somalia], to ter-
rorism). These challenges will continue 
to affect Somalia, Kenya and other coun-
tries in the region, thus contributing to 
the flow of migrants and refugees along 
the East African route.
The Sahel region and sub-Saharan 
countries face socioeconomic, political, 
security and climate-related challenges 
that will likely cause internal displace-
ments and international migratory move-
ments towards the EU. More specifically, 
the deterioration of security character-
ised by increased terrorist activities and 
banditry will likely cause additional IDPs 
and refugee movements to neighbouring 
countries. This could affect littoral states, 
which recently recorded their first terror-
ist attacks. Moreover, military coups that 
recently destabilised Mali, Chad, Guinea 
and Sudan could be experienced by other 
countries too.
These challenges will likely persist 
over time, generating significant irreg-
ular migratory flows towards the West-
ern African, Western Mediterranean and 
Central Mediterranean routes. The pro-
jected demographic explosion in Africa in 
combination with the impacts of the cli-
mate change and security issues might 
inflate migratory phenomena further in 
the course of the next decade.
Cooperation within the border man-
agement domain between the EU and 
the North African countries remains 
a priority, as well as cooperation with 
other partners in the area of migration 
management. This includes support-
ing capacity building to enhance border 
management and to improve fundamen-
tal rights in the region.
The forthcoming migration trends will also 
be influenced by factors such as remittances, 
geopolitical interests and foreign influence
Certain additional factors will play 
a potentially significant role in future 
migration trends. Remittances from es-
tablished diasporas will remain an impor-
tant financial resource for third countries, 
thus providing strong incentives for their 
governments to support international 
migration. Foreign influence – directly 
or via local proxies – in source countries 
of migration will persist in the context of 
broader geopolitical interests. The pres-
ence of foreign actors in Africa will in-
crease mainly due to global competition 
over natural and finite resources. Lo-
cal militias, armed groups and terrorist 
groups will likely benefit from the com-
petition among international players and 
other factors exacerbating the security 
situation. Lastly, certain African countries 
will be particularly vulnerable to targeted 
disinformation campaigns aimed at in-
fluencing political and public opinion.
Impact on EIBM
Legal and irregular migration will continue to 
be at the top of political agendas at national 
and EU level
Since 2015 the EU has been constantly 
improving migration governance and 
crisis preparedness in order to deal with 
a broad array of security and humanitar-
ian challenges, especially at the south-
ern external borders. Border security has 
been reinforced, including border and 
coast guard capacities; procedures have 
been put in place at hotspots to effec-
tively identify, register, accommodate 
and return irregular migrants; and fi-
nancial assistance has been provided to 
third countries. These efforts also culmi-
nated in the EBCG 2.0 Regulation and the 
creation of the Standing Corps of 10 000 
border and coast guards by 2027.
16 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
In the future, migration will remain 
at the top of the political agenda at na-
tional and EU level, as one of the most 
heavily contested topics, with differing 
views on migration policies towards eco-
nomic migrants, refugees, and asylum 
seekers. One-sided viewpoints favouring 
either open borders or ‘fortress Europe’ 
will contribute to political fragmentation 
and polarisation. Nonetheless, EU border 
management will have to uphold the rule 
of law, focussing on a broad array of se-
curity threats and the protection of peo-
ple in need of asylum and international 
protection in equal measure. 
EU border management will experience 
disproportionate migratory pressures between 
now and 2032
Recent migration and refugee crises 
on the southern and eastern borders indi-
cate that the EU will most likely encoun-
ter a higher frequency of such events. The 
interplay between complex geopolitics, 
a turbulent security situation, and other 
megatrends inside a hostile multipolar 
world will most likely instigate major 
changes, affecting various regions and 
third countries profoundly. Since certain 
neighbouring third countries might at-
tempt to instrumentalise migrant and 
refugee populations for political purposes, 
the EU could also face instances of the 
‘migration blackmail’ scenario (see below).
As future migration crises (and other 
security threats) will most likely affect 
the integrity of the external borders and 
test the effectiveness of EU border con-
trol systems, a comprehensive set of pol-
icy and organisational measures should 
be considered to enhance the level of gen-
eral and crisis preparedness of EU bor-
der management. In this framework, 
all components of EIBM (art.3 EBCG) 
might be enhanced for effective policy 
implementation.
The enhanced focus on the first and second 
tiers of the four-tier access control model for 
IBM might become an effective tool to curb 
irregular migration flows towards the EU
In the future, the ability and will-
ingness of Middle Eastern and African 
countries to maintain effective border 
management and control of migratory 
flows towards the EU will be essential. 
The EU may conclude status agreements 
with relevant third countries, establish-
ing closer cooperation and working ar-
rangements, in accordance with article 
73 of the EBCG Regulation. In this way, 
Frontex can implement its full mandate 
and provide technical and operational 
assistance to third countries of origin 
and transit while respecting fundamen-
tal rights.
To curb irregular migrations flows 
to the EU, these pre-frontier measures 
should complement other measures 
aimed at strengthening the EU’s external 
borders. Such measures should be com-
prehensive, as recent experiences have 
shown that migration crises and other 
disproportionate pressures affect vast sec-
tions of the Mediterranean Sea and the 
EU’s eastern land borders. Also, since ir-
regular migration trends are character-
ised by displacement effects in response 
to increased border controls, border man-
agement should be flexibly adjusted to 
the dynamically evolving situation in 
the field. The EBCG Standing Corps could 
play an important role in addressing op-
erational needs and requirements, such 
as maintaining a presence in certain pre-
frontier areas, providing additional ca-
pacity at impacted border sections, and 
swiftly responding to any new migratory 
patterns. A critical factor here is the ad-
equate staffing and reaction capacity of 
the Standing Corps, which is one of the 
most important EBCG assets in dealing 
effectively with irregular migration and 
border security threats. Successful im-
plementation of these measures in the 
pre-frontier area and at the external bor-
der will also have an effect on secondary 
movements within the Schengen area.
Finally, for the implementation of 
EIBM to be successful, it must take place 
in conjunction with external initiatives 
and internal EU policies, such as the pro-
motion of legal migration to deal with 
labour shortages (e.g., due to an aging 
population), the smooth integration of 
migrants into host societies, as well as 
EU foreign aid, trade agreements, and 
FDI in third countries.
3.2. Returns
With international migration exerting 
constant pressure on the EU’s management 
of migration, asylum and return over the next 
decade, cooperation with third countries will 
play a key role
The need for return operations will 
largely depend on the recognition rates 
of asylum seekers and refugees. This will 
be a dynamic process. Large mixed-mi-
gration flows towards the EU are to be 
expected, some of which will be eligi-
ble for return.
The recent geopolitical developments 
in the EU neighbourhood, the Middle 
East, Asia and Africa indicate the par-
amount importance of permanent and 
sustainable cooperation with third coun-
tries to ensure comprehensive, lasting 
and efficient migration management.
The European Council has repeatedly 
called upon the EU to create and apply 
“the necessary leverage, by using all rel-
evant EU policies, instruments and tools, 
including development, trade and visa, 
to achieve measurable results in terms 
of preventing illegal migration and re-
turning irregular migrants”. This requires 
a coherent, integrated and coordinated 
approach to EU-third country cooper-
ation. The New Pact on Migration and 
Asylum highlights the importance of ef-
fective cooperation with external partners 
on return, readmission and reintegra-
tion via “comprehensive, balanced, tailor-
made and mutually beneficial migration 
partnership” with third countries. It paves 
the way for a common EU system for re-
turns of which the EU’s relationships and 
17 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
partnerships with third countries is a vi-
tal element.
Frontex has been increasingly involved 
in assisting Member States with return 
activities to further boost and facilitate 
cooperation with third countries. In this 
context, Frontex has effectively increased 
operational support for Member States in 
all stages of the return process and ap-
plied a variety of other instruments and 
tools aimed at enhancing cooperation 
with third countries, including the de-
ployment of the European Return Liaison 
Officers (EURLOs) and the new “Techni-
cal Assistance Projects for third countries 
in the field of Return, Readmission and 
Reintegration” (TAP4RRR). The external 
dimension of returns is complemented 
by the support provided to the Member 
States and Schengen Associated Coun-
tries in the different stages of the return 
process and the different types of return 
(voluntary and non-voluntary, various 
means of transport and formats) as well 
as support in the area of post-return and 
reintegration.
Streamlining all phases of the return 
process and aligning with EU and non-EU 
partners is critical to meet the growing 
challenges of climate change, environ-
mental degradation, the impact of these 
on migration, the geopolitical impact if 
migration itself, and the subsequent pres-
sure on the EU’s external borders.
The streamlined, and in certain cases 
obligatory use of a border procedure for 
asylum and return, as proposed by the 
European Commission since 2016, could 
have a positive impact on the effective 
return of third country nationals whose 
application for asylum has been rejected, 
by limiting the risk of absconding. This 
impact would however be limited by the 
capacity of the Member States to imple-
ment such a border procedure and to 
assess asylum applications on time (12 
weeks was the timeframe envisaged by 
the European Commission), particularly 
in front-line arrival countries if reloca-
tions remain limited in the frame of the 
procedure.
The impact of the border procedure 
will also depend on the type of migrants. 
If they arrive unidentified or undocu-
mented, which is often the case in search 
and rescue procedures, issues will still 
exist in terms of identification and doc-
umentation of the migrants, and their ac-
ceptance by third countries. In any case 
it would mean even closer focus on sup-
port to front-line Member States as well 
as additional deployment of resources in 
those regions (and more need for align-
ment with Member States in terms of 
return sponsorship). Additional support 
and alignment between front-line Mem-
ber States and the Agency, also in relation 
to return sponsorship would be required.
Impact on EIBM
Returns have become a prominent part 
of EU border and migration management 
and will become even more important. 
The mixed migratory flows since 2015 
have made clear that migration man-
agement can be effective only in tandem 
with effective return practices. The con-
flict in Ukraine, Belarus’ hybrid activities 
and the millions of refugees showcase the 
importance of bolstering the EU’s capac-
ity and crisis preparedness for returns in 
order to facilitate the work of numerous 
stakeholders. All returns must be carried 
out in a  fast, orderly, humane and dig-
nified manner with respect for human 
rights and the safeguards provided by 
the Return Directive. However, the effi-
ciency of the EU’s return policy depends 
on addressing the external and internal 
dimensions of returns effectively.
As regards the external dimension, 
almost all Council Conclusions and 
Communications of the European Com-
mission have acknowledged an urgent 
need to identify, coordinate and imple-
ment all relevant EU policies and meas-
ures for improving the efficiency of the 
EU’s return system. Frontex has increased 
efforts to support Member States’ effec-
tive returns and will continue to do so. 
Member States’ cooperation with Fron-
tex will provide reliable near real-time 
situational awareness and improve their 
return systems and processes. Addition-
ally, the Agency’s capacity to organise its 
own return operations will be further 
developed in order to alleviate the op-
erational and administrative burden on 
the Member States. Through enhanced 
coordination, as well as the availability 
and deployment of additional resources, 
Frontex will consolidate its role as the 
operational arm of the EU return system.
Post-arrival and post-return support to 
Member States by Frontex will increase 
through the Frontex Reintegration Pro-
gramme. Procedures will be streamlined, 
allowing for diverse reintegration pack-
ages in terms of type and value. Reinte-
gration will promote cooperation with 
third countries and consolidate Fron-
tex as a key player in the area of return.
EU financial support and cooperation 
with third countries on return will likely 
gain even more importance in the up-
coming years with new bilateral, regional 
and multilateral cooperation frameworks 
and agreements, as returns remain a crit-
ical element of EU migration manage-
ment. Frontex return activities continue 
to compliment other areas of cooperation 
with third countries (e.g., technical and 
operational assistance, border control 
support, capacity building and training).
The development of the legal frame-
work on returns would allow the estab-
lishment of safe and legal pathways as 
well as capabilities for legal and orderly 
migration. Agreement on the Common 
European Asylum System (CEAS) and the 
Return Directive could create a legal basis 
for the faster processing of international 
protection applications and efficient re-
turn procedures for higher numbers of 
returnees.
Return systems and processes will 
benefit from digitalisation. The return 
data collection mechanisms, central re-
positories of information, Return Case 
Management System (RECAMAS) and 
online communication tools will allow 
efficiency gains and give more accurate 
statistics. The performance of national 
return systems will increasingly depend 
18 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
upon their digital transformation. Fron-
tex will become a central hub for research 
and innovation, setting common stand-
ards and requirements for ICT systems, 
both within and outside the EU, promot-
ing the optimisation of return processes. 
Digitalisation will also help third coun-
tries manage returns through the ref-
erence model for non-EU governmental 
return case management systems. De-
spite wide recognition of the importance 
of digitalisation, the challenges of harmo-
nisation, integration and interoperability 
will likely persist in the future due to the 
different technologies used by national 
return systems. Increased digitalisation 
will also raise data protection concerns.
In addition, new EU legislation will 
lead to the introduction of new return 
procedures at the border.
In the next decade, EU returns will in-
creasingly depend on the efficiency of the 
internal and external dimension of EU 
return policy. Given the turbulent inter-
national environment and the growing 
impact of migration into the EU, there 
will be a pressing need for significant and 
sustainable improvements on the EU re-
turn system to substantially increase the 
number of effective returns.
19 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
4. Cross-border crime
Migrant smuggling will remain one of the key 
crime areas which affects the EU’s external 
borders as well as internal security
More than 90% of irregular migrants 
that reach the EU make use of smug-
glers during some or all of their jour-
ney. Push factors in third countries (i.e., 
unemployment, insecurity, other socio-
political reasons, demography, natural 
disasters, conflicts) combined with pull 
factors in the EU (e.g., high living stand-
ards, employment opportunities) form the 
preconditions for migration. Migrants 
turn to smugglers when they lack in-
formation (when, where, how to enter 
the EU) or means (including technical) 
to reach the EU. The instrumentalisa-
tion of migration for the benefit of state 
actors has been a worrying new trend 
in recent years. The dehumanisation of 
migrants as a ‘weapon’ for political and 
strategic gains has been a feature of the 
increasingly hybrid nature of the chal-
lenges faced at the external borders.
Migrant smuggling activities are 
rooted both in third countries, where 
smugglers try to attract migrants and 
offer their services, as well as in the EU, 
where criminal networks facilitate sec-
ondary/internal movements, integrate 
migrants into national and EU (financial) 
schemes and further exploit them. The 
EU Action Plan for migrant smuggling 
2021-2025 establishes the development 
of dedicated and tailor-made Anti-Smug-
gling Operational Partnerships with third 
countries or regions along migratory 
routes towards the EU, reinforcing efforts 
to prevent these crimes before the prob-
lem reaches EU territory. Even though 
the application and success of these part-
nerships rely significantly on the level of 
engagement of third countries, strength-
ened cooperation with countries of ori-
gin and transit is undoubtedly crucial to 
suppressing the threat. Another impor-
tant factor is the use of modern tech-
nology in criminal activities. The online 
environment and widely available digi-
tal tools are thoroughly exploited at all 
stages of migrant smuggling, from adver-
tising and recruitment of clients or low-
level facilitators to communication with 
irregular migrants or among smugglers, 
to sharing travel guidance, provision of 
fraudulent documents and countermeas-
ures against law enforcement.
Document fraud is and might remain one of 
the fastest evolving enablers of various types 
of cross-border crime
Document fraud is the misuse of travel 
and ID documentation, and other sup-
porting/breeder documents used to iden-
tify holders. Associated crimes include 
migrant smuggling, trafficking in hu-
man beings or cross-border movements 
of third-country nationals. These illegal 
services are offered both to migrants at-
tempting to enter the EU and to those 
who have successfully entered the EU. 
Facilitation of secondary movements of 
irregular migrants already present in the 
EU and legalisation of residence status are 
key threats to the EU’s internal security. 
They unfold in an increasingly networked 
environment, with document fraud and 
legislation expertise provided as a service. 
The introduction of new border manage-
ment technologies (i.e., smart borders 
package/Entry Exit System and ETIAS) 
might stimulate crime groups to assess 
vulnerabilities in an attempt to overcome 
border and security controls. While travel 
and selected identification documents 
very often include advanced security fea-
tures protecting them against unlawful 
alterations or reproduction, this does not 
automatically guarantee full protection 
against fraud. When new technologies 
are introduced, they become available 
for legitimate producers of documents as 
well as for criminals. While manufactur-
ers are implementing the latest optical 
physical security features in combination 
with electronic components, fraudsters 
can also access advanced technological 
solutions. Concerning document fraud, 
smugglers are adjusting their business 
model through the use of messaging apps 
such as WhatsApp and Telegram in order 
to acquire fraudulent or genuine docu-
ments. The use of these apps and the data 
communicated cannot be easily detected 
by law enforcement agencies. Moreover, 
the complexity of sophisticated security 
features in travel documents may lead to 
vulnerabilities in the detection of unlaw-
ful alterations of these documents, as it 
requires time, expertise and equipment.
As regards particular modi operandi, 
impersonation (which falls under iden-
tity fraud) is considered one of the most 
prevalent types of fraud due to the chal-
lenges in reproducing or altering the lat-
est generation of EU travel documents. 
Another form of identity fraud, such as 
fraudulently obtained genuine docu-
ments, is even more difficult to detect. 
It is anticipated that this modus operandi 
will grow in the coming years. According 
to findings on the asylum-seeking pro-
cess, fraudulently obtained visas quite 
frequently pass EU border checks unde-
tected. Other advanced techniques and 
sophisticated methods of document 
forgery (such as various types of image 
20 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
alterations including morphing) will con-
tinue to pose difficulties for their detec-
tion at the borders in the coming years.
It can be assumed that new procedures 
such as ETIAS, EES and the VIS regula-
tion will, on the one hand, lead to more 
irregular migration on the green and sea 
borders as migrants try to evade controls. 
On the other hand, travellers will use 
deceptions concerning their identity if 
they have not received traveller author-
isation or a visa. Document and identity 
fraud will be a field of great importance 
in the future.
Trafficking in human beings, especially of 
victims originating in third countries, is 
a lucrative criminal business which will 
continue to grow
In the EU, in a single year, criminal 
revenues from trafficking in human be-
ings (THB) for sexual exploitation, which 
is the most prevalent purpose of THB, are 
estimated at about EUR 14 billion. The 
economic cost of trafficking in a single 
year is estimated at EUR 2.7 billion.27 The 
EU is a key destination region for vic-
tims of THB originating in third coun-
tries. Sexual exploitation is the prominent 
form, followed by labour exploitation. 
Forcing victims into crime has been on 
the rise, interlinking trafficking in hu-
man beings with other criminal activi-
ties, like drug distribution and property 
crime. Despite the differences between 
migrant smuggling and THB,28 the un-
derlying and facilitating factors that drive 
both criminal activities are intertwined. 
Thus, strategies and actions to curb smug-
gling may be applicable to THB and vice 
versa. The lack of legal and safe travel 
routes exposes irregular migrants to var-
ious forms of trafficking and creates op-
portunities for big profits for criminal 
networks. Criminal networks offer sim-
ilar services (document fraud, facilita-
tion of transportation, safehouses, etc.) 
and migrants might also be or become 
victims of trafficking during or follow-
ing the smuggling process.29
Conflict-induced migration and in-
ternal displacements have been a grow-
ing concern in recent years as the rising 
number of persons on the move due to 
armed conflicts and socio-political tur-
moil expose vulnerable groups to the in-
fluence of organised crime. The rising 
number of unaccompanied children on 
the move during health and humanitar-
ian crises significantly increases the risk 
of child exploitation. An estimated 42% of 
all forcibly displaced people in 2020 were 
children30 – a sign of exposure to vio-
lence and exploitation in origin, transit, 
and destination countries. In this regard, 
the war in Ukraine might have a signif-
icant effect in the coming years as the 
flow of people fleeing the war and other 
indirectly affected regions included vul-
nerable groups that may be exploited by 
criminal groups. The use of profiling and 
risk profiles by border control authorities 
is one way to detect THB, but awareness 
and close cooperation between all the ac-
tors involved remains a strong approach 
towards countering the phenomenon.
Smuggling of goods, including drugs and 
firearms, constitutes a serious threat to the 
internal security of the EU
Ninety percent of intercontinental 
trade uses maritime routes, thus a wide 
array of modi operandi used by organised 
criminal groups operating in drugs, 
weapons, and counterfeit goods smug-
gling occur in the maritime domain. Con-
tainerised transportation is the main area 
of the maritime trade supply exploited 
in transnational criminal activities. 500 
million containers are shipped world-
wide every year and by 2050 this num-
ber might have tripled.31 Less than 2% of 
these containers are inspected32, and the 
insignificant decline in the number of re-
ported incidents in 2020 and 2021, despite 
the operational constraints posed by the 
COVID-19 pandemic, indicates that crime 
groups can quickly adapt to any condi-
tions.33 This already challenging envi-
ronment will see further complexity in 
the coming years. The emergence of new 
transport routes like China’s Belt & Road 
Initiative (BRI) and the Artic Route, the 
current use of autonomous or even un-
manned vessels, the increasing use of AI 
in all port management-related activities, 
and the growth in capacity of cargo ves-
sels are examples of developments that 
will impact the global management of 
seaborne trade and the management of 
the EU’s external maritime borders. These 
developments are particularly relevant for 
the smuggling of illicit goods, which fol-
lows the same routes as licit commodities.
There has been a continuous increase 
in detections of drug smuggling34 on 
the EU borders in recent years. Recent 
changes in Europe’s illicit drug market, 
largely linked to globalisation and new 
technology, include innovations in drug 
production, trafficking methods, the es-
tablishment of new trafficking routes 
and the growth of online markets. In 
the global context, Europe is an impor-
tant market for drugs, with South Amer-
ica, West Asia and North Africa being the 
main source areas, while China and in-
creasingly India are source countries for 
new psychoactive substances, drug pre-
cursors and related chemicals. Canna-
bis is the most popular drug in the EU, 
with cocaine coming in second. Opera-
tional estimates have indicated 2021 as 
another record-breaking year for drug 
seizures in Europe. Moreover, huge drug 
busts in main producer countries and en 
route to Europe, combined with revela-
tions from disrupted encrypted commu-
nications, showed an alarming picture of 
the magnitude of drug-related crimes in 
recent years. Drug trafficking networks 
have become more aggressive, seizing 
every opportunity to make a quick profit 
by offering ever larger quantities.
Consecutive record-high quantities of 
cocaine seized in Europe every year since 
201735 indicate an expanding supply to the 
EU. Furthermore, cocaine cultivation and 
production potential in Latin America 
has increased significantly over the past 
10 years, indicating that the supply to 
the EU will persist. Although the Taliban 
takeover in Afghanistan is not expected 
21 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
to significantly affect heroin smuggling 
into the EU in the short term, in 2021, 
the amount of heroin seized in the main 
transit country, Turkey, as well as several 
large-scale seizures at EU seaports, sug-
gest that heroin trafficking has returned 
to its pre-pandemic levels.
The consequences of climate change 
and geopolitical changes in the context 
of the war in Ukraine can have a signif-
icant impact on drug markets, smug-
gling/transport routes and countries of 
origin. This crime area will certainly re-
main relevant for IBM and will develop 
dynamically, so must remain under con-
stant analysis.
Firearms smuggling is another dis-
tinctive business for organised crime 
groups and one of the most dangerous 
transnational crimes. As smuggling was 
severely affected by travel restrictions and 
more intensive controls during the pan-
demic, 2021 was marked by a return to 
previous levels of seizures at the EU’s ex-
ternal borders36. The majority of criminal 
networks (around 60%) employ violence 
as part of their criminal businesses37, and 
therefore this demand for weapons will 
continue to require a coherent counterac-
tion from the law enforcement and border 
guard authorities. Conflict areas around 
the globe have been proven countries of 
origin for weapons which are afterwards 
used either within the EU for illicit activ-
ities (organised crime and terrorism) or 
outside in other war zones. The fact that 
the distribution of military-grade weap-
ons such as hand grenades, rockets, and 
landmines has been a prominent business 
in Ukraine is an indicator of what could 
be expected in the future. The prolifera-
tion of firearms, explosives and ammu-
nition is likely to continue and intensify 
due to the military conflict in Ukraine, 
generating a long-lasting effect similar 
to other post-conflict zones. Smuggling 
of such weapons strongly depends on 
the persistence of armed conflicts and 
the security situation, the local availa-
bility and demand for such equipment 
and the control measures at the borders. 
For large-scale trafficking, access to ports 
or other major flows of goods (to hide 
contraband in other cargo in lorries and 
freight trains) will play a crucial role.
The value of risk profiling in the smug-
gling of goods and particularly in weap-
ons trafficking is of utmost importance. 
According to WCO, in 2019, 45 countries 
reported 8 190 unique cases of weapons 
and ammunition trafficking, a signifi-
cant increase compared to 2018, when 
42 countries reported 2 869 cases. The 
most common method reported for the 
detection of weapons and ammunition 
was risk profiling, which accounted for 
82.2% (6 735) of 2019 cases38. It is advisa-
ble to enhance this approach and use it 
to corroborate other existing technolo-
gies for maximising results.
Counterfeiting tobacco products is a highly 
lucrative business for the criminals trading in 
them
This trade has a significant financial 
impact on Member States’ budgets due 
to the substantial loss of excise revenue 
it entails.39 A recent study carried out by 
the EUIPO and the OECD estimated that 
counterfeit and pirated goods worth EUR 
119 billion were imported into the EU in 
2019, representing up to 5.8% of EU im-
ports.40 China and Russia are the main 
countries of origin for counterfeit ciga-
rettes smuggled into the EU, which not 
only is a destination for illicit tobacco 
products but also serves as a  transit to 
large markets such as the United King-
dom. Illicit tobacco products are trafficked 
via both land and sea borders in contain-
ers passing through major international 
ports and free economic zones. Following 
their arrival at seaports, shipments of il-
licit tobacco products are transported to 
their final destinations in lorries.
The criminal networks responsible 
for the import and distribution of the 
smuggled goods in the EU are believed 
to be based outside the EU. These net-
works maintain warehouses across the 
EU, mostly in industrial locations and 
close to transportation hubs. EU-based 
criminal networks are responsible for 
the distribution of imported counterfeit 
goods.41 Criminal networks involved in 
the production of counterfeit items are 
constantly monitoring consumer pref-
erences and adapting their products to 
meet changing demands. From an IBM 
perspective, it therefore requires constant 
observation of the current development, 
the evaluation of the effects and possible 
reactions of the criminal groups in order 
to find an appropriate operative response 
in coordination and cooperation with all 
security partners.
22 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
Figure 2 Reported quantity and estimated value of items detained in 2020 (EUROPOL-EUIPO, 2022)42
Vehicle crime will continue in the future, 
very likely encompassing electric or hybrid 
vehicles/vehicle parts 
Even though car manufacturers have 
added significant technological built-in 
security features to prevent theft or sup-
port geolocation after theft, criminals 
have adapted and use modern technol-
ogy to bypass security systems. There have 
been high levels of detections of stolen 
vehicles at EU external borders in past 
years, ranging from cars to trucks, buses, 
agricultural and construction vehicles. 
Stolen vehicles are either registered us-
ing false documentation or have altered 
security features or are dismantled and 
sold as spare parts. This trend will most 
likely continue in the future.
The growing adoption of electric mo-
bility is changing the vehicle markets. It 
is expected that the volume of electric and 
hybrid vehicles stolen to be dismantled 
will increase due to the very high prices 
of their components.
Other organised property crimes such as 
trafficking of high value stolen property 
(ranging from jewellery to world heritage 
patrimony, cultural goods and archaeological 
artefacts) should be carefully considered
The trafficking across the EU’s exter-
nal borders of high value stolen property 
is sometimes challenging to detect due to 
concealment methods, dissimulated own-
ership, or minimal understanding of the 
process. Such property also constitutes 
a currency for payment for criminal ac-
tivities, money laundering or trafficking 
of stolen goods.43 In the event of a global 
recession triggered by Russia’s war on 
Ukraine, high inflation and rising un-
employment in EU Member States and 
third countries, it can be assumed that 
property crime, smuggling and receiv-
ing of stolen goods will increase.
The use of state-of-the art technology 
and advanced digitalisation to avoid 
the identification of persons involved in 
cross-border crime will escalate in the future
Technology brings changes which af-
fect our everyday lives. These changes en-
compass illicit activities, which can be 
facilitated by modern technology. Crim-
inals exploit encrypted communications, 
use social media and instant messaging 
services to expand their customer port-
folio and reach a larger audience to ad-
vertise their illegal goods.
The criminal use of drones and other 
unmanned crafts is already a  reality. 
There is a  lot of ‘criminal potential’ in 
the use of advanced AI to avoid law en-
forcement and border guard controls.
The development of digitalisation as 
a service in criminal activities poses con-
siderable challenges for law enforcement 
and border authorities. Experts in devel-
oping digital solutions for criminal use 
may become more active on the market 
for cross-border crime. A parallel support-
ing business may develop, independently 
servicing criminal clients, providing cus-
tomised digital solutions for encrypted 
communications, travel guidance, pay-
ment of smuggling fees or provision of 
fraudulent documents. Currently, the 
No
. o
f i
te
m
s
Es
tim
at
ed
 V
al
ue
2017 2018 2019 2020
M
20M
40M
60M
80M
€0.0bn
€0.5bn
€1.0bn
€1.5bn
€2.0bn
€2.5bn
24M 21M
32M
20M
46M
44M
72M
56M
€1.9bn
€2.6bn
€2.5bn
€2.0bn
Border Internal Market Estimated Value
23 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
dark web and cryptocurrencies are not 
widely used in connection with migrant 
smuggling. However, in the near future, 
this might change.
The online environment and the wide 
array of easily accessible digital solutions 
increase the efficiency and professional-
ism of smugglers, allowing them to be-
come more agile and resilient against 
intervention and countermeasures from 
law enforcement, often by minimising 
their direct involvement in criminal oper-
ations to avoid traceability. In such a dy-
namic environment, law enforcement 
must demonstrate not only investigative 
skills, but also proactivity in integrating 
innovative techniques into combatting 
migrant smuggling and identifying digi-
tal traces of such criminal activities.
Impact on EIBM
Diversity in cross-border criminal activities 
is underpinned by a low-risk, high-profit 
business model and the forging of ties 
between criminal groups active in third 
countries and the EU
Criminals on both sides of the border 
work together to increase their activities 
in the EU criminal market by exploiting 
opportunities in third countries as well 
as in EU Member States and on exter-
nal borders. Vulnerabilities include low 
border/law enforcement capacity, lack of 
infrastructure and adequate technologi-
cal equipment, expertise or training, etc. 
There is no indication that these crim-
inal activities will decrease in the fu-
ture. Instead, they are likely to change 
format and adapt to new methods and 
modi operandi.
Across the EU, measures to monitor 
accurately and consistently the move-
ment of passengers and goods into or 
through the EU in conjunction with in-
telligence-led activities (i.e., risk profiling) 
will need to be enhanced. Interoperabil-
ity between existing and future systems 
of EU law enforcement and border con-
trol will play a crucial role in increased 
situational awareness and forecasting ac-
tivities and will allow for the enhanced 
use of existing resources.
There is a rising perception that crime 
is prospering and continually developing; 
operational actions have not stemmed 
the flow of illegal activities as crimino-
genic factors have not been (and poten-
tially cannot be) addressed on a scale that 
would reduce cross-border criminal activ-
ities on the EU’s external borders.
Some criminal activities such as smug-
gling of excise goods and environmental 
crime are still largely treated with low 
or even administrative penalties, allow-
ing criminal groups to keep their profits.
Intensive cooperation between all se-
curity authorities in the EU, interinstitu-
tional cooperation, information exchange 
and coordinated operational response are 
essential components of crime control. 
IBM must create the conditions for this.
The COVID-19 pandemic compelled criminal 
networks to devise new ways to conduct 
business
Relaxation of lockdown measures and 
the varying speeds of recovery worldwide 
have led to increased containerised trade 
flows. The surge in freight rates reached 
historical highs by the end of 2020 and 
early 2021, spreading across all routes 
worldwide. Licit commodities are ex-
pected to be increasingly shipped in con-
tainerised cargo, and criminal networks 
will try to smuggle illicit goods and ex-
ploit security weaknesses linked with the 
inability to carry out thorough checks of 
such great volumes of cargo. The digital-
isation of criminal markets and the pos-
sibility of anonymised deliveries of illicit 
goods, for instance through small parcel 
shipments, will increase, making it more 
challenging for authorities to identify and 
address the perpetrators.
Modern technology and advanced techniques 
will be increasingly incorporated into criminal 
activities; new, highly sophisticated modi 
operandi are likely to emerge
The EU will remain an important mar-
ket for illicit goods and, provided demand 
persists, criminal networks will continue 
to adjust their strategies to meet it. The 
use of drones for smuggling across bor-
ders, digital devices for guiding the ille-
gal crossings and cryptocurrencies for 
untraceable payments exemplify the in-
creasing use of modern technology in 
cross-border crime, which will make modi 
operandi increasingly sophisticated and 
difficult to detect.
The deteriorating security situation in the 
vicinity of the EU’s external eastern borders 
is expected to hinder EU and Member State 
efforts to prevent cross-border crime
The deterioration of factors which 
affect the security situation in neigh-
bouring countries such as Belarus and 
Ukraine, as well as the political situa-
tion in third countries which are either 
source, departure or transit countries for 
cross-border crime, is expected to hinder 
EU and Member State efforts to reduce 
the threat at the EU’s external borders. 
The EBCG will be under more pressure 
to cope with cross-border criminal ac-
tivities, and the lack of effective cooper-
ation with countries beyond our external 
borders would be detrimental.
The war in Ukraine already has a direct 
influence on numerous facets of cross-
border crime, but the long-term conse-
quences are pivotal. Trafficking in human 
beings poses grave risks to vulnerable 
groups entering the EU, and criminal 
networks will focus on countries where 
Ukrainian refugees are residing. Fire-
arms smuggling is another field where 
we may anticipate a situation similar to 
that of other post-conflict zones with in-
creased opportunities for smuggling ac-
tivities and an enhanced role of criminal 
networks. Other crime areas such as mi-
grant smuggling, document fraud, drugs 
and excise goods smuggling may also al-
low organised crime groups to thrive.
24 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
Across the EU, enhanced measures to monitor 
accurately and consistently the movement 
of passengers and goods into or through EU 
in conjunction with intelligence-led activities 
(i.e., based on risk profiling), needs to be 
strengthened44
Interoperability between existing and 
future systems used by EU law enforce-
ment and border control plays a crucial 
role in maintaining situational aware-
ness and forecasting, and can enhance 
the use of existing resources. It is antic-
ipated that cross-border crime will rise 
and have a substantial impact on the 
EU’s external borders and internal secu-
rity. The operational response at the bor-
ders necessitates coordinated efforts from 
all relevant agencies (border and coast 
guard, law enforcement, customs). The 
technological sophistication and digitali-
sation of cross-border crime modi operandi 
require the adaptation and modernisation 
of equipment and deterrence capacities. 
EIBM is a vital part of the international 
security infrastructure that aims to dis-
courage illicit operations. Without it, 
a comprehensive strategy against cross-
border crime cannot be realised.
In the context of border security, the flow 
of bona-fide travellers should be a priority 
concern both for security and contingency 
planning
The EU is in the process of a massive 
transformation of its regulated borders 
(e.g., EES, ETIAS, VIS), moving from es-
sentially physical border checks to a new 
paradigm consisting of a border con-
tinuum with different layers. This con-
tinuum comprises not only different 
decision levels but also a high degree of 
integration at the individual traveller 
(interoperability) and collective levels. 
This will enable unprecedented capabili-
ties for the EU, but at the same time will 
require proper planning to realise. Such 
planning is essential for correctly esti-
mating not only the resources required 
for business as usual, but also to ensure 
that a different range of scenarios are 
appropriately addressed to cope with the 
unusual and unexpected.
Against this background, it is essen-
tial for the agencies and Member States 
running these systems to have a deeper 
understanding of bona fide travel, its 
tendencies, driving forces and potential 
disruptions. In the absence of such in-
formation, the actors in the area of bor-
der management may not be prepared 
to cope with such demand, ultimately 
resulting in vulnerabilities and materi-
alisation of risk both at operational and 
law enforcement levels.
25 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
5. Terrorism
Terrorism will continue to be used by state 
and non-state actors and/or individuals as 
a tactic to channel specific political messages, 
or as an attempt to dismantle the current 
political or socioeconomic order
Violence will remain instrumental in 
causing a state of terror – or other psy-
chological repercussions. Primary targets 
will continue to be strategically chosen 
to ‘channel a message’ to a wider audi-
ence to influence the broad political en-
vironment. Jihadist-inspired terrorism 
is set to remain a primary threat for the 
EU; individuals loosely linked to existing 
militant groups will play a major role in 
maintaining a constant state of insecu-
rity and indirectly serve these groups’ 
propaganda efforts.
As observed during the pandemic, 
technology will also increase the risk of 
exposure to extremist propaganda as peo-
ple spend more time online – a condition 
which will continue to facilitate less so-
phisticated/high impact ‘lone wolf’ at-
tacks in the EU. In this sense, ‘we must 
continue to fight ISIL in cyberspace’ as 
with growing interconnectivity social 
media platforms will remain the pri-
mary operational space for recruitment 
and disseminating propaganda. Cyber-
space will also serve to direct or reacti-
vate sleeper cells.
The Sahel is set to continue experiencing the 
locus of terrorist violence over the coming 
years
Al-Qaeda and ISIS affiliates have 
shown their political abilities by exploit-
ing governance vacuums, local conflicts, 
and ethnic dynamics to recruit follow-
ers, hone their skills and project power 
southward. To date, the violence in the 
central Sahel has resulted in about three 
million internally displaced persons 
(IDPs) in Burkina Faso, Mali, Chad and Ni-
ger. The recent withdrawal of the French-
led Operation Barkhane and Takuba Task 
Force from Mali and the increasing foot-
print in the country of Russian mercenar-
ies might facilitate jihadist expansion and 
could generate migratory pressure to-
wards the EU.45 In all 2021 Sahelians rep-
resented only 3% of the overall volume of 
illegal border-crossings on the EU’s ex-
ternal borders.46
Hitherto relatively untouched, coastal 
west Africa is increasingly exposed to 
threats of terrorism and violent ex-
tremism, as confirmed by several deadly 
attacks in their northern borderlands at-
tributed to militant Islamist groups in 
2021.47 While this may indicate jihadists’ 
growing intent and capability, the overall 
focus of the violence so far remains local. 
The reasons for it are multiple.
Firstly, the Islamic State milieu in 
Africa faced several setbacks in 2021, 
chiefly related to factionalism. This of-
ten stemmed from militant groups be-
coming increasingly immersed in local 
dynamics in their attempts to play on 
local grievances. While on the one hand 
this often proved a successful strategy to 
enlarge their ranks, on the other it pulled 
terrorists into local conflicts, deflecting 
resources and attention from the groups’ 
wider objectives and further polarising ji-
hadists in the region.
Regardless of internal frictions, the ex-
pansion of Islamic State in recent years 
has also led to growing confrontations 
with al-Qaeda’s Jama ‘at Nusrat al-Islam 
wal-Muslimin (JNIM), which is a coalition 
of Al-Qaeda affiliated groups.*
Overall, in 2021 Islamic State has 
shown some interest in expanding its 
footprint in Central Africa as demon-
strated by the operational expansion 
pursued by its nominal affiliates in Mo-
zambique and DRC.
Following political turbulence stem-
ming from the delayed election process 
in Somalia, al-Shabaab has increased its 
tempo of attacks, which shows that the 
organisation continues to maintain op-
erational momentum and an ability to 
strike secure points across the country.
The focus on security dynamics in Afghanistan 
should not distract from the threat of Islamic 
State in Syria and Iraq
In the Levant, IS fighters continue 
taking advantage of peripheral areas to 
strengthen their position. Their grow-
ing operational ability has been shown 
by attacks on Kurdish-controlled pris-
ons to free fellow militants in a likely at-
tempt to enlarge their cadres. In parallel, 
recruitment efforts allegedly continue 
in displaced persons’ camps in northern 
Syria, where easy access, dire humani-
tarian conditions and a large population 
of IS fighters’ family members may of-
fer a population ripe for indoctrination.
Overall, thousands of FTFs that trav-
elled to the conflict zone – especially in 
Syria and Iraq – are still unaccounted for. 
To avoid capture some might have left 
one battleground to relocate elsewhere, 
taking with them skills and experience. 
* Harakat Ansar al-Din, the Front 
de Libération du Macina (FLM), Al-
Murabitoun, and the Saharan Emirate of 
Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM).
26 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
In this sense, growing instability in the 
Sahel or in other areas of Africa and the 
world may offer them suitable options 
to utilise their expertise. Tracking these 
individuals becomes complicated as they 
might be staying in several countries over 
a long period of time before moving/re-
turning to the EU. Hence, the need for 
synergies with security constituencies to 
strengthen multilateral intelligence shar-
ing and cooperation and to better tackle 
terrorists’ mobility and reduce the con-
sequent impact on the internal security 
of the Schengen area.
Yet the risk of entry of high-risk indi-
viduals will not exclusively relate to FTFs; 
it includes what can be broadly defined as 
‘subjects of interest’: e.g., people linked/
loosely linked to terrorist violence, those 
who may have committed war crimes and 
other international crimes that may lead 
to their exclusion from asylum proce-
dures, and FTFs’ family members. As re-
gards the latter, according to the UN48, 
almost 60 000 such people are hosted at 
Al HoI, the largest camp for refugees and 
internally displaced people in Syria. The 
camp includes “individuals with varying 
degrees of affiliation with the IS”49 and 
fighters’ family members including mi-
nors, who may attempt to travel to the 
EU. The main challenge here will consist 
in ensuring accountability for those affil-
iated with IS in line with international 
law while avoiding re-victimisation.
Following the Taliban’s takeover of 
Afghanistan in August 2021, there has been 
a harsh debate about the future security 
equilibrium of the country 
The debate is primarily linked to over-
all concerns on whether the new govern-
ment can successfully handle the Islamic 
State in Khorasan (IS-K) and what kind of 
threat IS-K might represent to the West. 
Following several noteworthy attacks 
(chiefly the one at Kabul airport during 
the evacuation in August 2021) IS-K has 
decreased its operational tempo. While 
this could be linked to seasonal trends, 
the volume of kinetic activity has also 
drastically fallen in urban areas.
Nonetheless, while not necessarily an 
immediate threat to the overall security 
of the country, IS-K certainly raises con-
cerns about possible infiltration of sym-
pathisers/affiliates amongst Afghans en 
route to the EU.
Impact on EIBM
EIBM mechanisms will play a significant role 
in tackling terrorism
The use of profiling for border control, 
close cooperation with the authorities 
responsible for countering terrorist ac-
tivities and awareness of the level of the 
terrorist threat are just some elements 
to be considered into the long-term fu-
ture. Nevertheless, there is an increased 
likelihood that technology will be used 
to better conceal the preparation of ter-
rorist activities or the terrorists them-
selves, as well as to diversify methods of 
attack (cyberspace might be more heav-
ily targeted in the future).
Widespread availability of information, 
communication technologies and social media 
applications will be a key enabler of terrorism
In the long-term, the internet, so-
cial media, encrypted communication 
technologies, cyberattacks, artificial in-
telligence/machine learning and crypto-
currencies will enable the organisation, 
financing and radicalisation of high-risk 
individuals. ‘Boundaryless’ information 
technologies are impossible to fully mon-
itor, thus they enable terrorist groups to 
reach out to millions of sympathisers 
around the world and spread their ex-
tremist propaganda. IT will be used as 
a ‘force multiplier’ for terrorist activities.
Conflict zones and hostile geopolitics will be 
creating ‘subjects of interest’
Serious geopolitical and socioeconomic 
problems in third countries, among other 
push factors, will increase the number of 
international migrants. Terrorist groups 
will continue to take advantage of high-
volume migratory flows towards Europe. 
This tactic will most likely be used to con-
ceal terrorists in the masses and help 
them cross into the EU undetected. Ter-
rorist groups will also attempt to recruit 
‘subjects of interest’ from the pool of trav-
elling people.
Terrorism will continue to represent a major 
threat for the foreseeable future
The timely sharing of information 
through the creation of an information 
architecture for border management, mi-
gration, and law-enforcement purposes 
will be crucial to improve border checks 
and operational responses. This will in-
clude the operationalisation of the Entry/
Exit System (EES), the European Travel 
Information and Authorisation System 
(ETIAS), the revised Schengen Informa-
tion System (SIS), and the revised Visa In-
formation System (VIS), which are to be 
ultimately integrated with the European 
Criminal Records Information System – 
Third Country Nationals (ECRIS-TCN) as 
well as Interpol’s specialised databases 
(e.g., SLTD, TDAWN).
As for the impact on overall IBM, one 
of the main challenges will be to safe-
guard the free movement of goods and 
people within the EU while protecting 
national security interests. Over the 
next decade EU border authorities will 
be increasingly requested to operate in 
and adapt to a fluid and multidimen-
sional operational environment. Beyond 
the political and security challenges dis-
cussed above, the EU will have to rethink 
cross-cutting institutional mandates and 
jurisdictional responsibility related to 
the border dimension in order to bet-
ter hinder terrorist/high-risk individu-
als’ mobility.
27 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
6. Hybrid Threats
Hybrid threats have become a recurring 
challenge to the European security 
architecture and will continue to challenge 
EIBM in the future
The term ‘hybrid threat’ refers to an 
action undertaken by state or non-state 
actors with the purpose of undermining 
or harming a target by affecting its deci-
sion-making process at the local, regional, 
and institutional level. Hybrid threats 
include the systematic targeting of key 
vulnerabilities in democratic states (e.g., 
open societies, free news outlets and so-
cial media, free market economies, politi-
cal pluralism, legislation, legal loopholes) 
in pursuit of strategic objectives.50 Ambi-
guity, plausible deniability and hiding the 
hybrid actors’ true intent serve to evade 
the response mechanism and decision-
making capability of the target.
The term ‘hybrid warfare’ became pop-
ular following a series of unconventional 
and irregular activities that in 2014 led to 
the seizure of Crimea and eastern Ukraine 
by Russia.51 The scope of hybrid threats 
has been revisited from both NATO and 
the European Commission: NATO has 
underlined the fact that hybrid threats 
comprise both military and non-mili-
tary as well as covert and overt means, 
such as disinformation, cyberattacks, 
economic pressure, use of regular forces 
and irregular armed groups. The Euro-
pean Commission has added that hybrid 
threats constitute a combination of co-
ercive and subversive methods, conven-
tional and unconventional activities (e.g., 
diplomatic, military, economic, techno-
logical), which can be used in a coopera-
tive manner by state or non-state actors 
to achieve particular objectives while re-
maining below the threshold of formally 
declared warfare.52
All these components will challenge 
border management in the future, from 
overwhelming flows of passengers at bor-
der-crossing points to the instrumental-
isation of migration.
Among the manifold reasons for the 
proliferation of hybrid attacks against 
the EU are their relatively low costs, cov-
ertness, deniability, and the significantly 
increased potency of the hybrid cyber 
toolkit (including disinformation) in the 
modern information age. During the sec-
ond half of 2019, Finland’s Presidency of 
the Council of the EU stressed the im-
portance of raising awareness on the na-
ture and scope of hybrid threats (e.g., in 
the financial sector) while the EU’s re-
cently released Strategic Compass for Security 
and Defence (March 2022) recognised that 
“hybrid threats grow both in frequency 
and impact”.53 It can be clearly assessed 
that in the future the hybrid interfer-
ence will be more predominant in bor-
der management.
The EU and Member States need to be 
prepared to prevent and respond to hybrid 
challenges
Although Member States themselves 
have the primary responsibility for coun-
tering hybrid threats, many of them face 
common threats that can be addressed 
more effectively through a coordinated 
response at EU level. In this context, the 
new Strategic Compass for Security and 
Defence refers to the development of 
the EU Hybrid Toolbox, which foresees 
a framework for a coordinated response to 
hybrid campaigns influencing the EU and 
its Member States. It comprises both ex-
isting and new instruments, such as the 
creation of EU Hybrid Response Teams to 
support Member States, CDSP missions 
and operations and third countries in 
dealing effectively with hybrid threats. 
Furthermore, the Hybrid Fusion Cell, as 
part of the broader Single Intelligence 
Analysis Capacity (SIAC) will provide fore-
sight and situational awareness to en-
hance the preparedness of both the EU 
and Member States.
Impact on EIBM
The EU’s commitment to fundamental 
rights makes its external borders a target 
for so-called lawfare54 by unscrupulously 
instrumentalising migration or by targeting 
the EU’s economic and energy security 
through coercion
The use of border policy to achieve and 
promote the foreign and security policy 
interests of third countries is one method 
of hybrid influencing. Hybrid activities 
against a Member State represent in most 
cases a continuation of a political or eco-
nomic dispute. Such activities aimed at 
border areas will not always have a sim-
ilar character to those that took place 
in 2014 in Crimea and the eastern prov-
inces of Ukraine.
A state aggressor will rely on an ex-
tensive catalogue of hybrid activities to 
achieve their aims and objectives. How-
ever, if those aims are not achieved, they 
employ radical methods in the form 
of quasi-military operations at bor-
der regions. Events of the ongoing war 
in Ukraine indicate that EU border ser-
vices can be among the first to encoun-
ter the effects of hybrid methods and 
will be forced to take some form of ac-
tion. The border guard/police units and 
their resources are always close to areas 
of potential conflict. One can predict that 
a hybrid (quasi-military) conflict will have 
28 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
a limited geographical scope (i.e., exter-
nal border section and adjacent region) 
and duration. Also, the aggressor’s forces 
will be limited in line with the scope of 
the planned actions.
Further military actions by the aggres-
sor will likely happen only if the conflict 
escalates due to disproportionate actions 
by the attacked side, risking all-out war-
fare that is not always the goal of either 
side. The neutralisation of a hybrid con-
flict that has already taken the form of 
quasi-military operations is a difficult and 
complex task. In principle, EU Member 
States should have the ability to discour-
age any opponent from deploying hybrid 
methods against them in the first place.
Hybrid interference is not limited to border 
areas between neighbouring states; it can 
have potentially global reach and implications
Third countries can provide political 
or material support to civil resistance 
movements to achieve regime overthrow 
and a host of other foreign policy objec-
tives. Hybrid operations in third coun-
tries may employ a variety of measures 
to cause political and socioeconomic in-
stability as well as influence irregular 
migration, organised crime and terror-
ism. The interference of private military 
and security companies (PMSC) and state 
support in Libya’s civil war is an example 
of hybrid strategy in action with broader 
negative effects.
Propaganda, the spread of fake information on 
visa and migration policies as well as criminal 
networks can be employed by potential 
aggressors to facilitate migrant journeys
The use of propaganda and fake infor-
mation can be used by potential aggres-
sors and result in increased migration, 
flows of dangerous goods (narcotics, 
weapons and ammunition) and infiltra-
tion of terrorists. Also, numerous sce-
narios can be realised in the maritime 
domain (seaports, territorial waters, ex-
clusive economic zones, and on the high 
seas) by state and non-state actors ex-
ploiting a target state’s vulnerability to 
hybrid threats and the major importance 
of socioeconomic activities in this do-
main (Hybrid CoE, 2019). In this way, an 
aggressor could exert considerable pres-
sure on a target state’s leadership, con-
fuse authorities and test their actions, 
and affect domestic policy. The ultimate 
goal behind this power game may be to 
put specific demands on the negotiation 
table – possibly linked to a broader stra-
tegic agenda – and influence the oppo-
nent’s political decision-making.
In the future, European IBM could be faced 
with a growing frequency of hybrid threats of 
increasing sophistication
Looking ahead, there are several rea-
sons for strategic actors to employ hybrid 
campaigns against the EU, some closely 
linked to the systemic vulnerabilities of 
EU democratic states and institutions and 
their commitment to fundamental rights. 
Most importantly, hybrid threats (includ-
ing migration blackmail) constitute an 
asymmetric strategy that attempts to 
offset an EU that in purely conventional 
terms (economic and military) is more 
powerful than almost all of its immedi-
ate neighbours for the foreseeable future. 
This conventional superiority is rein-
forced if EU Member States act collec-
tively. The hybrid ‘temptation’ also stems 
from the deniability that some hybrid 
actors may credibly maintain. In states 
with weak governance capacity in par-
ticular, this deniability may rest on the 
proclaimed inability to disrupt the busi-
ness of people-smuggling networks, by 
socioeconomic push factors that are due 
to external shocks and thus out of con-
trol, or the independent agency of mi-
grants exploring new migratory routes. 
All these arguments can be easily linked 
to demands that purport to address the 
roots of the problem. Indeed, as migra-
tion flows can be a major source of rev-
enue (e.g., in the 2021 Belarusian case, 
high fees were charged to migrants), cer-
tain countries and their governing elites 
(directly and indirectly) could profit from 
it – a powerful incentive for certain au-
thoritarian states.
29 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
7. Future scenarios for EIBM
This chapter presents four alternative 
scenarios about the possible directions 
of future events over the next decade. It 
includes challenging situations in the 
global and European environment. Of 
course, the unpalatable developments 
should be avoided by all means. The sce-
narios below are hypothetical – albeit 
plausible – stories (not predictions or 
prognoses) that could have an impact 
on EIBM.
7.1. Baseline scenario
Competition between global powers affects 
international cooperation and leads to 
a deglobalisation trend in which strategic 
autonomy is the dominant tendency
In a multipolar world, intense com-
petition between the great powers (i.e., 
United States, EU, Russia and China) char-
acterises the global landscape between 
now and 2032. The world order changes, 
creating ripple effects that influence all 
megatrends and EIBM. This situation has 
significant knock-on effects. Among other 
things, the pursuit of hegemony and the 
geopolitical aims of the great powers re-
sults in a breakdown of European and in-
ternational cooperation involving many 
other countries that support them. In 
particular, there could be insufficient co-
operation between countries inside and 
outside the EU to find effective and last-
ing solutions to major global problems 
(e.g., global security, geopolitics/econom-
ics, protection of global public goods, cli-
mate change, inequalities, 17 sustainable 
development goals).
The new world order is characterised 
by aggressive foreign and security pol-
icies, hybrid interference using a com-
bination of soft and hard power, and 
permanent crisis management of ex-
treme events, conflicts and crises. Glo-
balisation processes are affected, resulting 
in a slowdown or reversal of key trends 
observed until now. The work of inter-
national organisations is systematically 
undermined and/or influenced by the 
prevailing interests of the key actors, 
forcing them to perform mainly sym-
bolic roles. The legitimacy and account-
ability of global and regional governance 
systems are seriously challenged by na-
tion-states and their alliances. Countries 
show a preference to act alone instead of 
supporting multilateral efforts through 
international organisations, European 
bodies/institutions/agencies or NGOs. 
This also makes them vulnerable to eco-
nomic attacks.
Strategic autonomy becomes a key 
consideration for all countries as they 
try to find ways to reduce their vulner-
abilities, exposure and dependence on 
other countries. Almost all policy areas 
are affected by intense competition and 
hybrid interference turning them into 
arenas of contestation. Countries per-
ceive these policy areas as areas to defend 
or fight over considering the associated 
risks and opportunities for competitive 
advantage. This hinders cooperation be-
tween agencies (law enforcement but 
not exclusively).
Irregular migration, state-of-the-art 
technology and instrumentalisation of 
migration will continue to be main policy 
choices for third countries in order to 
put pressure on the EU and reach their 
geopolitical goals
The security megatrend gains signif-
icant importance as warring alliances 
prioritise their security, resulting in 
a modern arms race. They weaponise / 
instrumentalise everything in an un-
yielding pursuit of dominance and power. 
Connectivity and interdependencies are 
exploited to inflict harm on each other. 
The opposing great powers and alliances 
deploy various tactics of hybrid inter-
ference using their competitive advan-
tages. Hybrid operations cause great harm 
around the world (in certain cases greater 
harm than war itself ).
Irregular migration could return to 
pre-pandemic levels exerting consider-
able pressure on the EU’s external bor-
ders, despite significant increases in IBM 
capabilities for border control and sur-
veillance. Push and pull factors continue 
to play an important role and, in their 
search for a better life, aspiring migrants 
perceive the EU as an attractive destina-
tion. Unpredictable events lead to a sharp 
increase in migratory flows and the in-
terplay of megatrends amplifies the pres-
sure. Eastern Europe emerges as a new 
region for international migration, re-
quiring particular attention from the EU. 
Certain third countries use illegal migra-
tion as a tool to blackmail the EU and/
or specific Member States. Low-income 
countries that rely significantly on for-
eign remittances from their diasporas 
resort to migration blackmail or request 
development aid from the EU. Countries 
of origin of migrants instrumentalise mi-
gration in order to exercise influence in 
international relations (e.g., demand ef-
fective integration of migrant diasporas 
in the EU). This general context could af-
fect cooperation with third countries, at 
least for four of the elements of the EIBM: 
border control, search and rescue, return 
operations and risk analysis.
In the digital era, smartphone and 
social media addiction rises due the 
30 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
irresistibility of these products. Powerful 
actors continue to shape and form pub-
lic opinion and the views of specific tar-
get audiences. Online radicalisation and 
mobilisation to violence increase through 
the use of social media (e.g., various mes-
saging platforms, forums, online images, 
videos and publications) contributing to 
the evolution of terrorist threats. The big-
gest threats are known individuals (FTFs) 
and unknown high-risk individuals – 
not necessarily linked to any terrorist 
groups. But the threat will evolve not 
only in operational and organisational 
terms, but also in relation to the type of 
terrorism. Among other things, terrorists 
target the vulnerabilities of critical infra-
structures and digital technologies since 
they play important roles in modern so-
cieties. Large-scale information systems 
used for border control purposes could 
also be affected, generating vulnerabil-
ities in border control.
In the context of an increasing global 
population, the exacerbation of push and 
pull factors will trigger increased migratory 
pressure towards the EU
The demographic boom in Africa and 
Asia increases migratory pressure on the 
EU’s external borders. The EU’s ageing 
population and workforce shortages in 
certain industries require the creation of 
legal avenues for migration into the EU. 
In parallel, the EU experiences a harden-
ing of stances on migration in the polit-
ical discourse as a consequence of these 
growing migratory flows.
Climate change and environmental 
degradation will worsen over the next 
decade unless bold steps are taken by the 
international community. Existing soci-
oeconomic inequalities, security insta-
bility and insecurity in Africa and Asia 
displace large segments of national pop-
ulations internally as well as externally 
towards the EU and certain emerging 
economies. Low-income countries are in-
creasingly affected by natural disasters, 
and extreme weather phenomena which 
cause significant damage.
The COVID-19 crisis showed the im-
portance of the health megatrend (e.g., 
non-pharmaceutical interventions, vac-
cine development, equitable distribution 
of vaccines, funding for pandemic re-
search and pandemic surveillance). The 
crisis put an additional burden on devel-
oping regions of the world. Their severely 
affected economies and the uneven distri-
bution of vaccines indicated the problem 
of vaccine inequalities, which continue 
to exist in this scenario. EU border man-
agement plays a role in the management 
of future epidemics as certain measures 
should be taken at the external borders.
Systemic inequalities continue to in-
crease within and across countries. The 
multilateralism crisis further weakens 
international cooperation aimed at re-
ducing political and socioeconomic ine-
qualities (e.g., Africa is underrepresented 
in international organisations such as the 
UN Security Council). The poorest states 
are unable to respond to major societal 
and structural challenges (employment, 
education, gender issues, climate change, 
sustainable development goals).
EIBM is challenged by growing instability in 
the first and second tier exacerbated by hybrid 
challenges
The whole EU project and the cohesion 
of the Schengen Area is tested by major 
developments in the global security land-
scape. Major external threats and grow-
ing instability in the EU neighbourhood 
lead to a gradual militarisation of the 
EU’s external borders for national security 
purposes. This requires a rethink of the 
role of EU border management and the 
need for coordination with security and 
defence actors at EU and national level. 
The EU Policy Cycle on IBM entails sig-
nificant multi-level and cross-pillar co-
operation (i.e., CSDP missions, EU defence 
capabilities, Frontex Standing Corps, and 
national border coast guard agencies).
Cooperation between Frontex, Member 
States’ national agencies and third coun-
tries increases further. However, cooper-
ation with some third countries remains 
complex and difficult to manage. Political 
differences do not necessarily affect co-
operation at the level of border manage-
ment, but this varies depending on the 
context. In certain cases, the level of co-
operation may deteriorate as rival states 
and alliances try to undermine European 
cohesion. The dual mission of EU border 
management – that is the protection of 
external borders and fundamental rights/
humanitarian responses – poses oper-
ational challenges due to hybrid inter-
ference by rival countries. Even though 
certain countries attempt to break up the 
EU’s cohesion, the external threats con-
tribute to the creation of a united front 
among EU Member States.
A strong reaction encompassing enhanced 
forward thinking, monitoring of secondary 
movements and robust cooperation between 
Member States under the Frontex umbrella is 
launched to safeguard the efficiency of EIBM
In a more turbulent environment, EU 
border management requires more pro-
active and future-orientated risk analyses 
focusing on strategic foresight, antici-
pation of future events, preparation of 
alternative scenarios in support of oper-
ational deployment and border responses 
in general. The operational deployment 
of thousands of Standing Corps offic-
ers necessitates both regular and ad hoc 
operational reporting across thematic 
areas. This involves the development of 
both centralised and decentralised ana-
lytical capabilities. Migration, cross-bor-
der crime, terrorism and hybrid threats 
require specialised analytical capabili-
ties and capacities to support the pro-
duction of actionable thematic analyses. 
This practical requirement leads to a re-
organisation of the analytical functions 
at Frontex and at national level.
Frontex and its partner agencies at 
national level place particular attention 
on the need for pre-frontier intelligence 
and risk assessments in order to provide 
essential understanding and warning 
on existing and emerging threats. Vul-
nerability assessments identify exter-
nal border sections and BCPs that should 
be reinforced to counter external border 
31 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
threats. Large-scale information systems 
and EU databases are protected against 
the increasing occurrence of cyberattacks. 
EU border management also focuses on 
the need to control secondary movements 
within the Schengen Area, while at the 
same time avoiding the introduction of 
permanent internal controls that would 
go against the spirit of Schengen (aboli-
tion of internal controls).
Member States harmonise and 
strengthen the implementation of EU 
and national IBM strategies by estab-
lishing national quality control mecha-
nisms. This further supports the existing 
Schengen Evaluation and Vulnerability 
Assessment mechanisms.
SAR operations in the Mediterranean 
are carried out in such a way as to limit 
the possible involvement of non-state 
actors in order to avoid the facilitation 
or encouragement of migratory flows.
Research and innovation efforts lead 
to the development of various applica-
tions to support the analytical and op-
erational capabilities for more effective 
border security. In this context, strategic 
autonomy considerations allow EU bor-
der management to become more resil-
ient and sustainable while limiting its 
dependence on third countries and pro-
viders of critical technologies.
Frontex plays an important coordinat-
ing role in the field of returns by comple-
menting the activities of Member State 
agencies. However, the gap between re-
turn decisions and effective returns per-
sists due to a host of complex issues (e.g., 
conflict zones, unsafe third countries, lack 
of cooperation by third countries trigger-
ing the need to focus on return flights 
limited only to some destinations).
The education and training of EBCG 
Standing Corps and border and coast 
guards at national level is upgraded in 
view of the scope of external threats as 
well as the growth of EU border staff. The 
EIBM model and the sharing of technical 
expertise and best practices are promoted 
in third countries (e.g., training courses 
for third countries’ border personnel). 
Technical equipment and infrastructural 
investments complement such initiatives.
7.2. Best–case scenario
In the context of ensuring and constantly 
developing good relations with the countries 
neighbouring the EU as well as the states 
in the first and second tier, the impacts 
of climate change and the demographic 
megatrend are low
In 2032, despite continuing climate 
change challenges, disruptive weather 
phenomena and frequent large-scale nat-
ural disasters, cooperation between EU 
and non-EU countries remains good. Cli-
mate change has not had any socioec-
onomic impacts significant enough to 
cause mass migration towards the EU’s 
external borders. Formerly assessed high-
level risks associated with people seeking 
international protection from climate 
change/natural disasters have seen a de-
creasing trend.
By 2032, EU relations on the politi-
cal and economic level with the Russian 
Federation have restarted and are a func-
tional status quo. The conflict in Ukraine 
has ended.
The situation in Syria is politically 
stable and will remain calm. Syrian ref-
ugees in Turkey and Lebanon are return-
ing home. The efforts of EUBAM Libya 
in close cooperation with the UN Mis-
sion and Frontex are successful, and the 
migration flow from Libya towards the 
EU via the Mediterranean Sea has con-
stantly decreased. Refugees from these 
countries have meanwhile been inte-
grated into the socioeconomic systems 
of the receiving EU MS/SAC or voluntar-
ily returned to their countries of origin. 
The official border authorities in these re-
gions are effectively fulfilling their tasks 
and powers in full respect of fundamental 
rights. Turkey has overcome its financial 
crisis, and cooperation on matters related 
to migration, return, security and justice 
has been renewed.
EU countries’ and Frontex’s cooper-
ation with the Maghreb countries has 
risen to an almost optimal level, and there 
is full cooperation and exchange of in-
formation over the Eurosur system. The 
countries conduct joint SAR missions.
Despite the growing demographic 
pressure in African countries, high rates 
of economic growth have substantially re-
duced the intensity of a wide range of tra-
ditional push factors for the area. The EU 
External Investment Plan as well as direct 
aid projects supporting training and ed-
ucation for local populations, allied with 
the implementation of faster and more 
effective channels for regular migration 
from Africa to the EU, have allowed more 
and more migrants to choose these chan-
nels instead of irregular migration. Hu-
manitarian impacts associated with the 
use of the Mediterranean and West Af-
rican routes have fallen, as has the pres-
sure on reception facilities within EU 
territory, allowing for better living con-
ditions at camps, effective screening and 
integration procedures.
Border control will reach maximum efficiency, 
employing state of the art technology and 
joint risk analysis and developing fast reaction 
capabilities
The Frontex Liaison Officers (FLO) net-
work and a well-functioning risk analysis 
are fully implemented and enhance the 
cooperation with relevant third countries. 
MS/SAC, neighbouring and other third 
countries have deployed liaison officers 
from all the law enforcement authorities 
entrusted with border control to Frontex 
in order to strengthen their cooperation 
and communication with the Agency.
Eastern Partnership projects are on-
going and, due to the support of the EU 
and excellent cooperation, have a pos-
itive impact on information exchange. 
A well-functioning system of informa-
tion exchange with the Western Balkans 
states is developed through Working Ar-
rangements and trust-building measures.
Working Arrangements with tar-
geted Asian countries are implemented 
and close cooperation has been estab-
lished, which gives the Agency the abil-
ity to assess potential threats, establish 
32 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
sustainable operational partnerships as 
well as swiftly perform return operations.
In 2030, following the policy develop-
ment, EU border control will have reached 
maximum proficiency, making full use of 
environmentally friendly technological 
developments. Easy access to information, 
in real time, based on a one-time query 
to all operational, analytical and support 
databases, corroborated with the support 
of artificial intelligence for the identifi-
cation of risk entities (persons, goods, 
routes, documents, means of transpor-
tation, etc) has increased the efficiency 
of border checks to the maximum. This 
has enabled fast processing of bona-fide 
travellers and legitimate goods, while 
risk entities are identified based on risk 
analysis and submitted to second-line 
controls. Virtual fences have been built 
using unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) for 
the detection of irregular border-cross-
ings enabling rapid border intervention 
teams to assess the situation and inter-
vene accordingly. After interception, the 
screening procedure is applied, consisting 
in the identification of vulnerable groups 
of persons or persons in need of interna-
tional protection. Vulnerable migrants are 
referred to the responsible organisations 
to support their special needs.
All Member States and SACs have fully 
implemented the GDPR (General Data 
Protection Regulation) and reached the 
same level of acceptance and implemen-
tation of the legal and operational stand-
ards with regard to data protection and 
use of artificial intelligence for law en-
forcement. Data which could lead to the 
identification of an individual will be sub-
mitted to strong safeguards in full respect 
of the GDPR as well as the EU Charter of 
Fundamental Rights.
Search and rescue activities have 
reached reaction and intervention ca-
pability for 100% of persons in distress at 
sea, using national capabilities corrobo-
rated with Frontex and other EU agencies 
and bodies (EMSA, etc). These requests are 
addressed in full compliance with inter-
national and EU Law. The cooperation be-
tween all actors (national, European and 
international) carrying out SAR activity 
runs according to Regulation (EU) No 
656/2014. Once disembarked, vulnerable 
people are screened and specialised sup-
port is provided according to their needs.
Existing institutional mechanisms and 
processes reach maximum efficiency focusing 
on strong cooperation under the Frontex 
umbrella
The Eurosur framework provides a full 
real-time bird’s-eye view of detections 
of incidents on the EU’s external bor-
ders. The system includes cohort infor-
mation related to any incident detected 
at the external border or in the area of 
free movement (related to irregular mi-
gration, cross-border crime or requests 
for international protection). While in 
full compliance with respect to personal 
data, the information enables effective 
risk analysis at all levels, allowing the 
efficient identification of risks affecting 
the EU borders.
Inter-agency cooperation at national 
level is guided by a European framework 
meant to ensure an efficient approach to-
wards border control, search and rescue, 
return and tackling cross-border crimi-
nality. In addition, information exchange 
in the scope of EIBM is carried out on 
a common platform at national level, to 
ensure that timely and relevant infor-
mation is available to all actors involved 
and in cooperation with the national 
Ombudsperson.
Frontex leads the exchange, sharing 
and analysis of information on the ar-
eas covered by the EBCG 2.0 Regulation. 
All other EU Justice and Home Affairs 
Agencies (JHAA) are providing Frontex 
with data and operational and strate-
gic information related to EIBM com-
ponents. SItCEN is working closely with 
Frontex in assessing existing and poten-
tial threats and contributes to the ex-
change of information.
The Schengen evaluation mechanism, 
performed on a regular and ad hoc ba-
sis (announced and unannounced eval-
uations), has the capacity to identify all 
areas of expertise that require improve-
ments or are missing. At the same time, 
identified best practices are efficiently 
implemented by all Member States. Mem-
ber States fully support the Schengen 
evaluation mechanism with their exper-
tise and adequate numbers of experts to 
perform the evaluation visits.
Regular trainings for Schengen eval-
uators are organised twice a  year by 
Frontex, with full support of Member 
States’ experts in order to enhance the 
Schengen evaluation mechanism. Every 
trained Schengen evaluator contributes 
to a minimum of one Schengen evalu-
ation a year. Since the basics of the or-
ganisational structure and functioning 
of the border authorities in the Member 
States are already well-known and evalu-
ated, the Schengen evaluation question-
naire focuses on changes and emerging 
developments.
The vulnerability assessment process alleviates 
weaknesses at the external borders
A secure, automated and user-friendly 
data exchange platform for the exchange 
of a wide range of information related 
to vulnerability assessment is available 
and managed by Frontex. Use of state-of-
the-art technologies, including artificial 
intelligence is an essential part of the vul-
nerability assessment process. Vulnera-
bilities result from identified threats and/
or evolving developments that will have 
a high impact on the EU’s external border.
EU Member States have the capacity 
and capabilities to implement all nec-
essary measures identified as areas for 
improvement during Schengen evalu-
ation or/and vulnerability assessment. 
Capacities and capabilities are developed 
through clear capacity and capability de-
velopment plans developed jointly with 
Frontex as a response to emerging devel-
opments or identified areas that need im-
provement. Member States also use this 
approach to fill gaps and vulnerabilities 
identified during national quality con-
trols, performed before or in between 
Schengen evaluations.
33 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
Enhanced cooperation with third countries 
leads to effective return activities
Safe and legal pathways out of the 
area of free movement are guaranteed. 
The EU has signed readmission agree-
ments with all countries of origin from 
where most irregular migrants come. An 
effective pre-entry screening process is in 
place following the provisions of the EU 
Pact on Migration and Asylum which is 
now implemented. Third-country author-
ities deploy experts to the Member States 
to support identification processes. The 
authorities recognise their citizens and 
give them return travel documents. In ex-
change, the EU finances programmes for 
returnees to be accompanied through the 
procedure and to support their socioec-
onomic reintegration. Returned persons 
are fully supported in the framework of 
EU reintegration programmes in accord-
ance with the European Strategy for Vol-
untary Return and Reintegration. Third 
countries are fully committed to coop-
erating in identifying, re-documenting 
and readmitting their nationals.
Return monitors participate in each 
return flight and ensure that force is only 
used in accordance with the principles 
of proportionality, precaution and ne-
cessity. The special needs of vulnerable 
people are considered. The application of 
the European Asylum system at the level 
of EU Member States upholds the prin-
ciple of non-refoulement and people are 
allowed to appeal the decision during the 
return procedure all across Europe. This 
has increased the numbers of returns, 
also further paving the way for volun-
tary returns due to counselling from re-
turn counsellors.
The close cooperation within the EIBM 
context extends to training under the aegis of 
Frontex, for both EU and non-EU actors based 
on the threats at the EU’s external borders
Training of border guards within 
the Schengen area is done jointly with 
the Frontex Standing Corps in order to 
achieve a uniform and highly efficient 
European standard level. Training will 
also focus on cross-border crime.
All countries within the Schengen area 
have investigation teams on standby to 
respond immediately to major forms of 
cross-border crime and irregular mi-
gration. Frontex teams on standby are 
trained and capable of physically rein-
forcing border control within one week 
where needed, with the support of tech-
nical resources.
With the development of transport 
technologies and economic globalisation, 
migration is expected to increase in the 
next 10 years. Migration also arises from 
demographic imbalances between devel-
oped and less developed countries. Legal 
migration will be encouraged by various 
migration and integration programmes 
within the EU, targeting identified eco-
nomic and social areas of interest.
With the aim of supporting third 
countries, EU Member State border au-
thorities offer their risk analysis and 
other expertise in the form of regular 
training to authorities in third countries, 
including on fundamental rights. Train-
ing is performed under the TAIEX mech-
anism as well as by Frontex.
Health challenges related not only to 
possible human pandemics, but also to 
other fast spreading and dangerous in-
fections of plants and animals, are con-
trolled by the WHO and the European 
Medical Agency. Clear and uniform guide-
lines are available for the control of risks 
at the EU’s external border to support bor-
der authorities.
7.3. Worst–case scenario
In a multipolar world, most countries will take 
a neutral stance or maintain good relations 
with the adversaries of the ‘West’
Over the next decade a  multipolar 
world emerges. The attempt to remake 
the world in the Western image – that is, 
by spreading liberal democracy, integrat-
ing more countries into the open market 
economies of the West, and promoting 
fundamental rights – encounters strong 
resistance from non-Western countries. 
Many third countries reject Western ide-
als and pursue their own strategies. They 
acknowledge the fact that since the inter-
national arena is anarchic, a multipolar 
(or bipolar) world is better than a hegem-
onic order (unipolarity) characterised by 
despotic tendencies and lack of restraint. 
Multipolarity and multilateralism creates 
a more complex world, but in this way, 
countries are less dependent on Western 
hegemony and its undesirable effects. 
The Arab world, under the leadership of 
the rich states of the Gulf, charts an in-
dependent course, making clear that the 
Western quest for ‘democratisation’ is in-
compatible with their governance sys-
tems, traditions and culture.
The West has a  less dominant posi-
tion in the new world order. Economic 
and military power is distributed un-
evenly among four great powers and 
their alliances (USA, EU, China and Rus-
sia). By 2032, China has achieved super-
power status due to the meteoric rise of 
its economic and military strength. De-
spite significant economic and military 
losses, Russia has largely achieved its ge-
opolitical goals, changing the global and 
European security order.
In this turbulent decade, growing dis-
satisfaction with the liberal international 
order, the perceived need to balance un-
ipolar power, and various power-seek-
ing/revisionist agendas spread conflict 
around the world. Russia continues its 
aggressive efforts to allegedly create a se-
curity ‘buffer zone’ around its borders.
Major transformations shift the global centre 
of gravity to the Global East and South
There is no grand strategy about in-
ternational peace, coexistence, coop-
eration and prosperity. In a multipolar 
world such ideas are mere fantasy. The 
United Nations and other international 
organisations continue to play largely 
symbolic roles unable to fill the gap in 
global governance. All strategic think-
ing by great and middle powers focuses 
on how to thwart enemy plans and crush 
opponents.
34 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
China’s grand strategy is put into 
practice, making a real difference for its 
citizens. The political idea of ‘common 
prosperity’ is successfully realised, send-
ing a clear message to friends and foes 
around the world.
While the situation in Europe is com-
plex and turbulent, major political and 
socioeconomic transformations shift the 
global centre of gravity to the East. Coun-
tries in Africa, the Middle East, East and 
West Asia develop closer political and eco-
nomic ties in response to perceived West-
ern domination. These countries learn 
important foreign policy and strategic au-
tonomy lessons from the West itself. They 
look carefully at Russia’s war on Ukraine 
and the West’s economic war on Russia 
and draw their own conclusions. Fear-
ing loss of sovereignty and great harm 
to their national interests, they increas-
ingly assume a neutral, independent and 
realist posture in international relations.
The countries of the global East and 
South see the West as pursuing global 
hegemony through military, political, 
economic and cultural means to pre-
dominately serve Western interests. In 
their view, since the West engages in the 
‘weaponisation of interdependence’ by 
controlling the global financial system, 
the existing international structures and 
rules cannot be trusted because they limit 
these countries’ domestic/foreign policy 
options and future possibilities. Realis-
ing the extreme level of their depend-
ence and vulnerability, the countries of 
the global East and South pursue specific 
initiatives to reduce Western control (e.g., 
by creating new organisations and net-
works for economic/financial and secu-
rity cooperation).
Geopolitical, economic and security 
competition shapes state interests
By 2032, clearly defined poles of power 
and spheres of influence have emerged: 
USA with the EU and other NATO coun-
tries (the West), Russia and China. The 
latter two countries are strategically 
aligned and cooperate closely. The de-
velopment of a new world order, and the 
quest for power, transforms the world 
into an arena of confrontation. The revival 
of nationalist and revisionist ideas spark 
regional conflicts. The hostile multipo-
lar world enters a long period of intense 
competition. Economy, energy and tech-
nology are critical areas for the pursuit 
of dominance and strategic autonomy in 
the fields of foreign policy and security. 
Many countries invest heavily on milita-
risation, engaging in an arms race with 
their competitors. Some countries try to 
acquire nuclear weapons technologies 
and/or build such weapons. Middle pow-
ers chart independent realist courses to 
balance their security dilemmas. Weaker 
states ally with the East and/or the West 
to manage critically important issues.
The war in Ukraine will exacerbate crime, 
terrorism and migration trends
The war in Ukraine has not only 
changed the international and European 
security order but has also caused an in-
crease in serious and organised crime in 
general at EU level. The regional conflict 
makes weapons (ranging from pistols and 
assault weapons to rocket launchers) eas-
ily available, resulting in a dramatic in-
crease in violence on the EU’s external 
borders. The majority of CBC groups in-
volved in various smuggling activities 
across the green and blue borders are 
heavily armed and pose a grave secu-
rity threat to border patrols and Stand-
ing Corps officers.
Crime groups also turn to environ-
mental crimes, such as the illegal impor-
tation of hazardous waste (e.g., medical 
waste generated by the COVID-19 pan-
demic) due to lucrative profits involved. 
Despite health hazards, criminals ex-
plore the possibilities of selling airborne 
pathogens. Bioterrorism threats increase 
significantly as terrorist groups try to ac-
quire and weaponise them.
A high number of migrants and refu-
gees enter the EU in the next decade (ap-
prox. 10 million persons fled Ukraine in 
2022 alone). Many new criminal enter-
prises become established in the EU us-
ing financial resources from war-torn 
areas to create and infiltrate legal busi-
ness structures. Due to serious integra-
tion issues, the populations of migrants 
and refugees across the EU provide great 
opportunities for recruitment into crim-
inal groups.
The world will experience irreversible climate 
change and global famine
The average global temperature rises 
2-3°C (and continues to increase) trig-
gering unprecedented environmental 
cascades in the Amazon, Siberia, the Arc-
tic and the Great Barrier Reef. Climate 
change is irreversible, and the planet 
starts to experience extreme ‘hothouse’ 
effects (e.g., heatwaves, droughts, wild-
fires, desertification, rising sea levels and 
floods) causing destruction, environmen-
tal degradation and human suffering. By 
2032, the world has realised that a unique 
opportunity to manage the climate crisis 
has been lost. Containment of the wors-
ening climate effects is extremely dif-
ficult, putting a huge burden on future 
generations.
Global famine is inevitable as Ukraine 
and Russia, two of the largest global pro-
ducers of grains have stopped exports. The 
severe effects of climate change, short-
ages in the agricultural workforce, and 
lack of viable replacements for depleted 
grain products causes a major food cri-
sis characterised by the steepest ever in-
crease in global food prices.
EIBM will face technological challenges, 
political bias in SAR operations and 
insufficient resource availability
The digitalisation of EU border con-
trol faces problems: the use of technol-
ogy (including large-scale information 
systems) for automatic biometric con-
trols is vulnerable to hacking, and various 
criminal groups manage to circumvent 
the security features, enabling imper-
sonators to pass electronic border gates. 
Virtual fences built at the EU’s external 
borders generate a high number of (of-
ten provoked) false alarms, whilst disa-
bling human intervention when illegal 
35 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
border-crossings take place. Following 
a rapid digitalisation process, Member 
State agencies responsible for border con-
trol lack significant human resources and 
their performance is hindered by IT sys-
tem failures.
Search-and-rescue (SAR) operations 
performed as part of border manage-
ment activities are hindered by politi-
cal bias and consequently impact respect 
for fundamental rights. Returns of third-
country nationals who are the subject of 
return decisions issued by Member States 
are forcibly applied based on prejudice 
against nationality and ethnic origin, 
following political tensions.
The efficient and uniform approach 
of EIBM is disavowed by the national 
authorities of EU Member States that 
mainly focus on serious external border 
challenges that are vital for their national 
security. The EBCG Standing Corps, Fron-
tex equipment and the number of staff 
are insufficient to respond effectively to 
the nature and high volume of requests 
for assistance by EU Member States. Fron-
tex faces a complex situation as Member 
States refuse to participate in Frontex-
coordinated operational activities due 
to lack of resources. This also hinders 
the exchange of information and oper-
ational cooperation between Member 
States’ agencies. EIBM is affected by a ma-
jor vulnerability stemming from the ex-
tensive use of technological applications 
for intelligence and security purposes to 
the detriment of the crucially important 
human factor. Due to the digitalisation 
priority and the lack of human resources, 
the effectiveness of border management 
is limited and shows, among other things, 
an inability to identify serious/emerg-
ing threats and provide early warnings. 
Effective returns are impeded by hos-
tile international trends and reluctance 
to cooperate, lack of trust and fear of or 
risk of conflict.
In this context, compensatory meas-
ures within the area of free movement 
also become less and less effective due to 
lack of local coordination, resources, coor-
dination at the European-wide level and 
commitment from national authorities.
7.4. Security scenario
The instrumentalisation of migration continues 
to be used in the context of regional conflicts 
and growing violence which generates large 
inflows of IDPs and asylum seekers
Over the next decade, political dy-
namics in countries neighbouring the 
EU continue to play a major role in the 
overall security of the Union. Russia’s 
political ambitions keep framing its for-
eign policy and consequently posing a se-
curity threat to the eastern flank of the 
EU – yet not limited to this area. This 
impacts EIBM in multiple ways (e.g., in-
creasing the volume of people wanting 
to cross into the EU to pursue better eco-
nomic prospectives or accumulations of 
IDPs in the broader region).
Yet threats to the Union do not solely 
stem from the eastern flank: Areas in 
the MENA region continue to serve as 
pressure points on the EU. The Western 
Balkans continue to offer a viable corri-
dor towards the EU; a situation which 
provides malicious individuals ample 
opportunities to take advantage of the 
migratory flow. Migrants in this region 
are of particular concern given the pres-
ence in the region of radical religious 
preachers with strong ties with EU reli-
gious extremist milieus.
Overall, migration continues to be 
instrumentalised to increase politi-
cal pressure and attempt to influence 
the EU’s foreign policy by facilitating 
the irregular flow of migrants to the EU. 
This scenario requires political dialogue 
with source/neighbouring countries with 
a view to curbing these risks. Yet, this 
might not always prove successful. This 
is of particular concern considering the 
complex diplomatic relationship with 
Iran, Turkey and several countries in Af-
rica which might decide, for example, to 
‘turn a blind eye’ to orchestrated/coordi-
nated flights towards countries neigh-
bouring the Union to exercise pressure 
on the EU should the East/West divide 
continue to grow. High numbers of mi-
grants in countries neighbouring the EU 
create huge potential for unilateral or 
coordinated multilateral instrumental-
isation of migration.
The Taliban victory in Afghanistan 
plays on different levels in the overall 
recruitment of jihadists and their politi-
cal/military ambitions, though the major 
risk to the EU from this region will likely 
derive from migrant outflows. Growing 
violence – especially in the Sahel – in-
creases displacements of people. Political/
security vacuums are exploited by mili-
tants to try to enter into local dynamics, 
foster coalition-building, and represent 
a  tool for criminal/local groups to ad-
vance their own agendas. To this end, 
their ambitions are increasingly inter-
twined with the exploitation of migra-
tory flows for financial gains. Infiltration 
by returning fighters (terrorists and sub-
jects of interest) could have a severe im-
pact on the EU’s internal security.
This is also a concern when consider-
ing the return of individuals who trav-
elled to Ukraine to join the conflict. The 
risk here for the EU’s internal security is 
the return of soldiers with combat ex-
perience/exposure to atrocities/traumas 
whose behaviour might be unpredictable 
or dangerous. Such experience could give 
ideological/far right individuals credibil-
ity/legitimacy to recruit/radicalise others 
upon returning to their home countries. 
Promoting synergies with security con-
stituencies to allow for multilateral in-
telligence sharing and strengthened 
cooperation will remain essential.
Insecurity coupled with environmen-
tal changes – mainly in Africa and cen-
tral Asia – continues triggering large 
regional displacements of people – and 
could result in more conflicts over ac-
cess to natural resources and more move-
ments/accumulations of people within 
the region with possible deflections to-
wards the EU.
Cross-border crime on the EU’s external 
borders will continue to pose a grave threat to 
the internal security of the EU
The criminal economy continues to 
intersect with militants’ and terrorist 
groups’ economic and political ambitions. 
36 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
Local/regional marriages of convenience 
further strengthen these bonds – as dem-
onstrated by the involvement of jihadist 
groups in Syria in the smuggling of irreg-
ular migrants to the EU. Overall, cross-
border crime poses a great threat to the 
EU’s external borders and affects the ca-
pacity of border authorities. Drug and 
firearms trafficking as well as migrant 
smuggling and trafficking in human be-
ings are criminal acts which continue 
to fuel insecurity within the EU. Supply 
of drugs from criminal hotspots such as 
Latin America and Afghanistan contin-
ues to rely on demand from the EU drug 
market. Widespread conflicts around the 
world lead to an increase in firearms traf-
ficking from and to conflict zones.
Private actors also play a role in the 
overall security of the EU by exploiting 
political instability in third countries. 
Specifically, private security companies 
offer their services in areas such as the 
Middle East (e.g., Syria) and Africa (e.g., 
Libya, Central Africa, the Sahel) and often 
represent political/economic interests of 
other countries in the region.
The abuse of fundamental rights will increase 
the vulnerabilities of EIBM both from the 
security and irregular migration perspective
The EU’s commitment to fundamen-
tal rights continues to make its exter-
nal borders a target of so-called lawfare 
which unscrupulously instrumentalises 
migrants.
Migratory flows enabled by a neigh-
bouring state would rapidly overwhelm 
EU border controls and migration man-
agement capacities, leading to a situ-
ation where it may be very difficult to 
uphold migrants’ fundamental rights. 
In the backdrop of this scenario, Member 
States would struggle to maintain a bal-
ance between ensuring internal security 
and their commitment to international 
law/EU values. In some cases, this would 
force Member States to introduce com-
pensatory measures that may not be fully 
in line with international law/EU values, 
which may contribute to political fric-
tions within the Union.
In this sense, political instability and 
insecurity in countries of origin will be 
detrimental for the implementation of 
return procedures. The authoritarian re-
gimes developing in areas such as the Sa-
hel, Maghreb, Middle East, Central Asia 
and close to the EU’s eastern borders will 
not fulfil the minimum standards of hu-
man rights, and cooperation with the 
EU will deteriorate. The immediate im-
pact would be the inability of the Union 
to effectively return migrants to their 
countries of origin, and an increase of 
secondary movements may be observed.
Technology used in border control will enhance 
efficiency but also generate vulnerabilities of 
hybrid nature
Technological advancements help ter-
rorist and criminal organisations rap-
idly adapt to a  highly interactive and 
communicative operational environ-
ment by shaping and re-shaping their 
organisational and operational posture, 
challenging law-enforcement detection 
capabilities. The use of cutting edge tech-
nology including large-scale informa-
tion systems for border control could also 
prove to be a vulnerability for EIBM if 
subject to hacking. Therefore, technol-
ogy increases the hybrid nature of secu-
rity threats, requiring Member States to 
raise technological awareness and infor-
mation-sharing across the larger security 
and IBM community and encouraging 
cooperation among all actors involved 
in border management. Document fraud 
remains a tool to facilitate a broad spec-
trum of criminal activities, e.g., the use of 
forged/fraudulently obtained documents, 
the misuse of legally issued genuine doc-
uments, legislative gaps (e.g., for persons 
with multiple nationalities).
As for border control measures at the 
external borders, one of the main chal-
lenges will be to safeguard the free move-
ment of goods and persons within the 
EU while protecting national security 
interests. The growing volume of ex-
change/flow of persons and good facil-
itated by technological advancements 
will also entail more challenges for the 
effectiveness and efficiency of border con-
trol measures.
As observed during the pandemic, 
technology increases the risk of expo-
sure to extremist propaganda as people 
spend more time online – a condition 
which continues to facilitate less sophis-
ticated/high impact ‘lone wolf’ attacks 
in the EU.
The EU’s progress in creating an infor-
mation architecture for border manage-
ment, migration, and law-enforcement 
purposes includes several new systems 
e.g., the Entry/Exit System (EES), the Eu-
ropean Travel Information and Authorisa-
tion System (ETIAS) which allow officers 
to access data on the criminal history of 
people subject to international requests 
for cooperation or alerts. Interoperabil-
ity persists as a challenge in the context 
of an increasing role of artificial intelli-
gence and biometrics in border control.
This interconnectivity of the informa-
tion systems increases the complexity 
of the interdependency of critical infra-
structures – including both physical and 
information technology facilities criti-
cal for the maintenance of vital societal 
functions. This widens the opportunities 
for cybercriminals to exploit structural 
vulnerabilities and cause disruptions to 
integrated IT systems, steal data (create 
false identities), and disrupt communi-
cation channels, to cite just a few poten-
tial dangers. Drones, nano and quantum 
technologies, 3D printing, artificial intel-
ligence, and the Internet of Things pro-
vide endless possibilities to be misused 
and cause harm on a large scale or to sup-
press human rights. Despite legitimate 
civil uses, their dual-use nature makes 
them prone to abuse by authoritarian 
rulers – let alone criminal and terror-
ist networks – to support, for instance, 
propaganda, recruitment and incitement, 
training, planning and coordination, fun-
draising and cyberattacks.
Aside from conventional methods 
used by crime groups to smuggle persons/
drugs/arms into and within the EU, crim-
inals will likely enhance their use of UAV 
or aeroplanes for these kinds of activities. 
37 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
Small/medium-sized piloted airplanes or 
UAV, flying undetected at low altitudes, 
could be used to transport migrants (in-
cluding persons of interest). In addition, 
submarines might be increasingly used 
for criminal activities.
Intra-agency cooperation and inter-agency 
cooperation between entities entrusted 
with border control, both at European and 
international level, plays an essential role in 
the efficiency of EIBM
Cooperation with third countries/
neighbouring third countries remains 
an essential pillar of the EIBM concept 
to ensure the overall internal security of 
the EU. The Union continues to invest re-
sources in enhancing the capacity of na-
tional authorities in third countries to 
collect and analyse data to strengthen 
their countries’ border management. That 
said, data protection/fundamental rights 
considerations likely hinder information 
exchange and cooperation with those 
countries.
Overall, the next decade sees EU bor-
der and coast guard authorities increas-
ingly operating in and adapting to a fluid 
and multidimensional operational en-
vironment. In this sense, the military 
is expected to play an increasing role in 
responding to security issues along the 
EU’s external borders, for example, to 
complement law-enforcement efforts to 
maintain public order along the border 
and/or at BCPs.
Cooperation between customs and 
border management authorities contin-
ues to be a challenge. A revision of the 
current legal framework of the agencies 
involved in border management likely 
facilitates cooperation and information 
exchange. Additionally, cooperation with 
border control authorities in countries of 
transit and origin for irregular migration 
and cross-border crime improves EIBM.
38 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
8. Conclusions and Recommendations
Over the past two years, consecutive cri-
ses have erupted in the EU neighbourhood 
and beyond (i.e., instrumentalisation of mi-
gration, COVID-19 pandemic, hybrid activi-
ties by Belarus, Russia’s war on Ukraine and 
the refugee crisis), largely confirming the 
SRA 2020 findings. These major events will 
have primary and secondary effects that will 
be felt for a long-time, making crisis man-
agement a permanent feature of EU bor-
der management between now and 2032.
The war in Ukraine will have major in-
ternational consequences even if it ends 
relatively soon through a negotiated agree-
ment and a new geopolitical/security order. 
In this case, Ukraine could heal the de-
structive effects of war through a long pro-
cess of reconstruction with international 
support. Otherwise, it could develop into 
a long-lasting conflict, the effects of which 
will be experienced throughout this dec-
ade through military combat, hybrid inter-
ference and other actions. In this scenario, 
the situation in Ukraine might evolve into 
another zone of instability adjacent to the 
EU’s eastern borders. Moreover, the war 
could escalate further unless political de-
cisions avert a  large-scale military con-
frontation between Russia and the NATO 
alliance. Already the conflict has triggered 
economic turmoil, unprecedented refu-
gee movements, an energy crisis and food 
shortages. Many countries report higher 
inflation and rising consumer prices. These 
problems will worsen the socioeconomic 
situation, possibly sparking violent protests 
and social unrest in low-income countries. 
The consequences on EIBM will range from 
increased pressure on the EU’s external 
borders (both for border checks and border 
surveillance) to secondary movements and 
protection of fundamental rights.
The next decade will be characterised 
by intense geopolitical antagonism and 
tensions due to the conflicting interests 
of countries. Competition over economic 
(production/trading) activities, the availa-
bility of finite resources (e.g., energy, wa-
ter, food, materials), technological issues, 
sovereignty disputes and military capa-
bilities will inflame international rela-
tions and cause new security crises and 
instability that will also affect Europe.
The hostile geopolitical and security 
environment will likely affect all meg-
atrends as well as international coopera-
tion and coordination on issues of major 
importance to humanity (e.g., global pub-
lic goods, climate change, sustainable de-
velopment goals) and the functioning of 
international organisations. Demographic 
imbalances, climate change, public health 
challenges, growing inequalities, and gov-
ernance challenges constitute a complex 
set of global problems that must be ad-
dressed; alternatively, their global effects 
will intensify and impact EU border and 
migration management.
In the next decade, EU border man-
agement will experience a higher oc-
currence of migration/refugee crises 
(or disproportionate pressures) that will 
test the effectiveness of EU border con-
trols and surveillance. The complex inter-
play of geopolitics, security conflicts and 
other megatrends will influence different 
regions of the world, including countries 
in close proximity to Europe. The EU may 
encounter different ‘migration blackmail’ 
attempts by neighbouring third coun-
tries to instrumentalise migrant and ref-
ugee flows for political purposes. In this 
context, returns will be a key capability 
of EIBM, as migration management de-
pends heavily on effective returns carried 
out in a fast, orderly, humane and digni-
fied manner. Effective and lasting coop-
eration with third countries in the EU 
neighbourhood, the Middle East, Asia and 
Africa will be crucial to all areas of EIBM.
Significant threats and challenges will 
be encountered in the next decade requir-
ing strategic adjustments and compre-
hensive responses to improve the general 
preparedness and crisis preparedness 
of EU border management. The impor-
tance of EU border management, as a key 
process for the EU’s external and internal 
security, will increase further. Consistent 
policy implementation with emphasis on 
the organising framework of the 15 IBM 
components (art.3 EBCG) will play a cru-
cial role in strengthening EU border se-
curity and countering threats effectively. 
Specifically, risk analysis, border control 
and surveillance, technical and opera-
tional measures, return of third coun-
try nationals, training, SAR, cooperation 
and coordination at national and supra-
national level with third countries and 
neighbouring third countries will require 
constant political and organisational at-
tention to remain relevant and effective 
in the face of existing, emerging or un-
foreseen threats.
The EU, as a defender of the ‘European 
and global security order’ and champion 
of human rights and rules-based order, 
should effectively manage its strategic 
interests beyond its borders. Emphasis 
on the external dimension of EU border 
management through training, techni-
cal assistance, joint operations, risk anal-
ysis and pre-frontier activities is essential 
to manage risks proactively and prevent 
strategic surprises and crises. The war 
in Ukraine and the emergence of an in-
creasingly hostile security environment 
should be closely monitored and assessed 
as they will have serious geopolitical, se-
curity and socioeconomic implications 
for EU border management.
39 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
ANNEX – Methodological Note
Strategic thinking on megatrends and 
their interplay is imperative to assess 
global risks and provide foresight and 
alternative future scenarios. The Strate-
gic Risk Analysis (SRA) supports policy 
formulation, decision-making and ca-
pability development planning in the 
context of the multiannual strategic pol-
icy cycle on EIBM. The SRA 2022 comple-
ments and updates the findings of the 
SRA 2020 report, which was used by the 
European Commission to prepare its re-
cent Policy Document. These two SRA 
reports should be read together to un-
derstand better the threats, challenges, 
and opportunities for EIBM.
Every two years Frontex, in close coop-
eration with EU Member States, prepares 
the SRA. It aims to identify threats, chal-
lenges and opportunities in the field of 
EIBM and return over a 10-year horizon. 
The first SRA in 202055 was intended for 
the preparation of the multiannual stra-
tegic policy cycle for EIBM56.
The SRA 2022 employed a proven qual-
itative methodology comprising a liter-
ature review, consultations with Member 
State experts, megatrends implications 
assessment and scenario-building. Meg-
atrends, either on their own or in com-
bination, shape human activities now 
and in the future, and so require con-
stant policy attention. To complement 
and update the relevant findings of SRA 
2020, the present report prioritised six 
megatrends (i.e., security, demograph-
ics, climate change, inequalities, health 
challenges, and governance systems) and 
assessed their impact and possible influ-
ence across the thematic areas of inter-
est (i.e., migration, returns, cross-border 
crime, terrorism, hybrid threats) to assist 
policymaking and strategic planning in 
the context of the multiannual strategic 
policy cycle on EIBM.
The literature review covered a broad 
spectrum of academic and practitioner 
fields involving cross-domain analy-
sis and thematic exploration. It covered 
the selected megatrends, migration and 
returns, cross-border crime, as well as 
terrorism and hybrid threats, that are 
presented in the body of the report, with 
the purpose of assessing their strategic 
implications for EU border management.
The Strategic Risk Analysis Network 
(SRAN) and the internal Round Table on 
SRA (‘expert groups’) provided input to 
help prioritise megatrends, assess their 
impact on EU border management, de-
velop alternative scenarios, and validate 
findings. Close cooperation and consulta-
tions with Member States’ experts were 
crucial for the successful preparation of 
the SRA 2022 report.
A megatrends implications assess-
ment was conducted as it is essential to 
improve understanding on global trends 
and the root causes of phenomena as 
well as to anticipate how they might af-
fect the EU’s external border security in 
the future. Megatrends57 are hugely in-
terlinked and constitute a complex set of 
equally important risks and challenges for 
EIBM. For SRA 2022 purposes, six meg-
atrends were singled out as most rele-
vant for further analysis and updating, 
in consultation with all stakeholders: 
security, demographics, climate change, 
inequalities, health challenges, and gov-
ernance systems.
The assessment of megatrends is a de-
manding exercise involving cross-do-
main analysis, subject matter expertise, 
and diverse perspectives that go far be-
yond the border management domain. 
It also relies on the sensemaking abili-
ties and intuition of experts to consider 
a broad array of global forces and their 
possible effects on EU border and migra-
tion management.
Scenario development combined 
narrative scenario-building and expert 
group consultations with the purpose 
of identifying possible and plausible fu-
ture directions. The overall approach was 
qualitative and explorative allowing for 
a broader reflection on future events and 
possibilities.58 While acknowledging the 
impossibility of accurate long-term fu-
ture predictions, this holistic view helps 
in developing ‘unbiased’ scenarios by con-
sidering all types of futures.59 The process 
was also transparent, inclusive, and partic-
ipatory involving all internal and exter-
nal stakeholders.
In line with established qualitative 
methodology, it was also recognised that 
these alternative scenarios can be “struc-
turally different, i.e., they should not be 
so close to one another that they become 
simply variations of a base case.”60 In this 
way, the experts envisioned possible and 
plausible futures – including ominous, 
unexpected, and undesirable ones – and 
assessed their impact on EIBM.
This methodology was employed sys-
tematically in close cooperation with 
Member States’ experts with the pur-
pose of managing the research efficiently 
and delivering a quality product.
40 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
Endnotes
1 Wigell, Mikael (2019). Hybrid interference as a wedge strategy: a 
theory of external interference in liberal democracy. International 
Affairs, 95(2), pp. 255–275, https://doi.org/10.1093/ia/iiz018  
2 https://knowledge4policy.ec.europa.eu/foresight/tool/
megatrends-hub_en
3 RAND (2020). Geopolitical Trends and the Future of Warfare. 
RAND Corporation: Santa Monica, California.
4 See https://www.sipri.org/media/press-release/2022/
world-military-expenditure-passes-2-trillion-first-time
5 See e.g., recent EMCDDA-Europol assessments on cocaine and 
methamphetamine markets at https://www.emcdda.europa.eu/
publications/eu-drug-markets/cocaine_en  and  
https://www.emcdda.europa.eu/publications/eu-drug-markets/
methamphetamine_en 
6 See e.g., Nivette, Zahnow, Aguilar, et al. (2021). A global analysis 
of the impact of COVID-19 stay-at-home restrictions on crime. 
Nature Human Behaviour 5, 868–877, available at  
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-021-01139-z
7 See e.g., Kemp, Buil-Gil, Moneva, Miró-Llinares, & Díaz-Castaño 
(2021). Empty Streets, Busy Internet: A Time-Series Analysis 
of Cybercrime and Fraud Trends During COVID-19. Journal of 
Contemporary Criminal Justice, 37(4), 480–501.  
https://doi.org/10.1177/10439862211027986
8 See Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (IDMC) reports at 
https://www.internal-displacement.org/global-report/grid2021/ 
9 See latest update of the Ukraine Refugee Situation at  
https://data2.unhcr.org/en/situations/ukraine 
10 See also https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/ 
11 Kavrakis, Konstantinos (2022). Identity and Ideology through the 
Frames of al-Qaeda and Islamic State. Terrorism and Political 
Violence, DOI: 10.1080/09546553.2022.2035366 
12 See, for example, https://www.c2es.org/content/
extreme-weather-and-climate-change/ 
13 Kummu, M., Heino, M., Taka, M., Varis, O., & Viviroli, D. (2021). 
Climate change risks pushing one-third of global food production 
outside the safe climatic space. One Earth, 4(5), 720-729.  
doi: 10.1016/j.oneear.2021.04.017
14 https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-paris-agreement/
the-paris-agreement 
15 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_21_3541 
16 Steffen, W., Rockström, J., Richardson, K., Lenton, T. M., Folke, 
C., Liverman, D., . . . Schellnhuber, H. J. (2018). Trajectories of 
the Earth System in the Anthropocene. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 115(33), 8252-8259. doi:10.1073/
pnas.1810141115  
17 See, for example, https://www.swissre.com/dam/jcr:e73ee7c3-7f83-
4c17-a2b8-8ef23a8d3312/swiss-re-institute-expertise-publication-
economics-of-climate-change.pdf 
18 https://www.eurekalert.org/news-releases/950893 and Carlson, 
Albery, Merow, et al. (2022). Climate change increases cross-
species viral transmission risk. Nature, https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41586-022-04788-w 
19 E/CN.9/2021/2 - E - E/CN.9/2021/2 -Desktop (undocs.org), p.9  
20 See https://www.nature.com/articles/s41599-020-00700-x and 
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41562-021-01122-8 
21 https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2018/09/19/
decline-of-global-extreme-poverty-continues-but-has-slowed-
world-bank
22 https://population.un.org/wpp/Graphs/Probabilistic/POP/TOT/900 
23 See European Commission (2022). Communication from 
the Commission to the European Parliament, the European 
Council, the Council, the Economic and Social Committee 
and the Committee of the Regions. COM (2022) 107 final, 
available at: https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/
com_2022_107_1_en_act_part1_v4.pdf 
24 See https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/
ip_22_3121
25 European Commission (2022). Communication from the 
Commission to the European Parliament, the European Council, 
the Council, the Economic and Social Committee and the 
Committee of the Regions – Ukraine Relief and Reconstruction. 
COM(2022) 233 final, available at https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/
default/files/ukraine-relief-reconstruction_en.pdf
26 Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) Report – Global Economic 
outlook 2022 assessing the impact of war on G7 economies, 
Russia, and Ukraine
27 Study on the economic, social and human costs of 
trafficking in human beings within the EU (2020) available 
at https://ec.europa.eu/home-affairs/policies/internal-
security/organised-crime-and-human-trafficking/
trafficking-human-beings_en 
28 https://www.unodc.org/e4j/en/tip-and-som/module-11/key-issues/
differences-and-commonalities.html 
29 https://www.unodc.org/e4j/en/tip-and-som/module-11/key-issues/
differences-and-commonalities.html
30 UNHCR, Global Trends, Forced displacements, 2020,  
https://www.unhcr.org/flagship-reports/globaltrends/ 
31 https://www.oecd.org/ocean/topics/ocean-shipping/
32 Annual report of the UNODC-WCO CONTAINER CONTROL 
PROGRAMME 2020, p.1
33 In terms of diversification of routes as in means of concealment.
34 Including the preliminary estimation for over 240 tons in 2021.
35 Europol, 06 May 2022, EU Drug Market: Cocaine.  
See: https://www.emcdda.europa.eu/publications/
eu-drug-markets/cocaine_en#section7 
36 According to Frontex data collected from 16 EU MS and EFTA 
countries sharing aggregated statistics on seizures at the external 
borders (data as of 10 February 2022), a total of more than 3,700 
firearms were reported, mainly at the land borders.
37 Europol (2021), European Union serious and organised crime 
threat assessment, A corrupting influence: the infiltration and 
undermining of Europe’s economy and society by organised 
crime, Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg.”
38 World Customs Organization, Illicit Trade Report 2019, p. 185, 195
39 EUROPOL – EUIPO, Intellectual Property Crime – Threat 
Assessment 2022, p. 26
41 of 41
Frontex · Strategic Risk Analysis 2022
40 Ibid, p. 36
41 Ibid p. 34-35
42 EUIPO & Europol (2022). Intellectual Property 
Crime Threat Assessment 2022. Luxembourg: 
Publications Office of the European Union, available at 
https://www.europol.europa.eu/publications-events/publications/
intellectual-property-crime-threat-assessment-2022 
43 The results of the Operation Pandora V run by Europol between 
01 June and 31 October 2021 at the different ports, airports and 
border crossing points, with the participation of Law Enforcement 
and Customs authorities from 31 countries, led to the seizure of 
more than 56000 cultural goods (archaeological objects, furniture, 
coins, paintings, musical instruments and sculptures) detected 
while being trafficked.
44 The EU has introduced the Excise Movement and Control System 
(EMCS) which provides Member States with an electronic system 
to monitor the movement of excise goods in real-time. The 
existing system will be supported by the traceability system, 
according to which all packets of tobacco products will be 
required to be marked with a unique identifier, more information 
at EUROPOL – EUIPO, Intellectual Property Crime – Threat 
Assessment 2022, p. 26
45 https://data2.unhcr.org/en/situations/sahelcrisis 
46 Frontex data
47 https://africacenter.org/spotlight/
the-growing-threat-of-violent-extremism-in-coastal-west-africa/ 
48 https://reliefweb.int/report/syrian-arab-republic/united-nations-
resident-coordinator-and-humanitarian-coordinator-14 
49 www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2021/11/syria-repatriate-at-least-
27000-children-held-in-dire-conditions-in-north-east-syria/
50 https://www.hybridcoe.fi/hybrid-threats-as-a-phenomenon/ 
51 Banasik, M. (2016). A Changing Security Paradigm. New Roles for 
New Actors – The Russian Approach. Connections: The Quarterly 
Journal, 15(4), 31-43.
52 See European Commission, & HR/VP. (2016). Joint communication 
- Joint Framework on countering hybrid threats: a European 
Union response. (JOIN(2016) 18 final).  Retrieved from https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52016JC00
18&from=en and European Commission, & HR/VP. (2018). Joint 
Communication - Increasing resilience and bolstering capabilities 
to address hybrid threats. (JOIN(2018) 16 final).  Retrieved from 
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:5
2018JC0016&from=EN 
53 European Union (2022). A Strategic Compass for Security and 
Defence, available at https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/
press-releases/2022/03/21/a-strategic-compass-for-a-stronger-eu-
security-and-defence-in-the-next-decade/ 
54 The use or misuse of law as a substitute for traditional military 
means to achieve an operational objective.
55 See https://frontex.europa.eu/assets/Publications/Risk_Analysis/
Risk_Analysis/Strategic_Risk_Analysis_2020.pdf 
56 See https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32019R1896 
57 See https://knowledge4policy.ec.europa.eu/foresight/tool/
megatrends-hub_en 
58 There are various methodologies (e.g., qualitative, quantitative, 
exploratory, predictive, normative) to build alternative scenarios. 
See e.g., Börjeson et al. (2006). Scenario types and techniques: 
Towards a user’s guide. Futures, 38 (7), 723-739,  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2005.12.002 
59 See Kosow, H., & Gassner, R. (2008). Methods of Future and 
Scenario Analysis: Overview, Assessment, and Selection Criteria. 
German Development Institute (DIE). https://www.die-gdi.de/
en/studies/article/methods-of-future-and-scenario-analysis-
overview-assessment-and-selection-criteria/
60 OECD (2017). The Next Production Revolution: Implications for 
Governments and Business. OECD Publishing: Paris.  
See p. 303, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264271036-en 
Plac Europejski 6 
00-844 Warsaw, Poland
T +48 22 205 95 00 
F +48 22 205 95 01
frontex@frontex.europa.eu 
www.frontex.europa.eu
Risk Analysis Unit
Reference number: SAMD/RAU/SFALEM/7782/2022
Paper version: 
TT-09-22-275-EN-C 
ISBN 978-92-9467-430-2 
doi: 10.2819/618977
PDF version: 
TT-09-22-275-EN-N 
ISBN 978-92-9467-431-9 
doi: 10.2819/76165
FPI 22.5042

