W
Risk Analysis
for 2021

Risk Analysis for 2021
Plac Europejski 6, 00-844 Warsaw, Poland  
T +48 22 205 95 00 
F +48 22 205 95 01 
frontex@frontex.europa.eu 
www.frontex.europa.eu 
Warsaw, April 2021 
Frontex reference number: 3665/2021 
 
Cover photo: © Frontex 2020 
All rights reserved. 
Paper version: 
TT-AC-21-002-EN-C 
ISBN 978-92-9471-999-7 
doi:10.2819/10063
PDF version: 
TT-AC-21-002-EN-N 
ISBN 978-92-9471-998-0 
doi:10.2819/390202
DISCLAIMERS 
This publication or its contents do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of Frontex 
concerning the legal status of any country, territory or city or its authorities, or concerning the delimitation 
of its frontiers or boundaries. 
All maps and charts included in this report are the sole property of Frontex and any unauthorised use is 
prohibited. Frontex disclaims any liability with respect to the boundaries, names and designations used 
on the maps. 
Throughout the report, references to Kosovo* are marked with an asterisk to indicate that this designation is 
without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSCR 1244 and the ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo 
declaration of independence.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
In the preparation of the Risk Analysis for 2021, Frontex has been able to draw on a great range or information 
provided by Member States, third countries and partner agencies. 
The Agency would like to express its gratitude to all Member States’ representatives in its Risk Analysis 
Network and third country partners for their efforts in providing data and analysis, as well as EASO and 
Europol, and all colleagues involved in the preparation of this report.
2 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
Holger Fa-
bian Sahl
Contents
1. Foreword 6
2. Summary 8
3. Introduction 10
4. Methodology 11
5.  Migratory Flow 13
5.1 Situational Overview 14
5.2 Facilitation of Irregular Migration 18
5.3 Third Country Overview 20
5.4 Fraudulent Documents 22
5.5 Returns 24
5.6  An Integrated Asylum-Migration Picture by EASO, Europol and Frontex 26
6.  Other Border Management Challenges 31
6.1 Terrorism 32
6.2 Cross-Border Crime: Firearms Smuggling 34
6.3 Cross-Border Crime: Drug Trafficking 36
6.4  Cross-Border Crime: Cigarette Smuggling 38
6.5  Cross-Border Crime: Detections of Stolen Vehicles 42
6.6 Border Guards’ Workload and Air Borders 44
7. Outlook 46
8. Statistical annex 48
3 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
4 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
List of acronyms used
BCP  border-crossing point
CIS  Commonwealth of Independent States
CSDP  Common Security and Defence Policy
EASO  European Asylum Support Office
EBCG  European Border and Coast Guard
EC  European Commission
ECDC  European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control
EDF  European Union Document-Fraud
EDF-RAN  European Union Document-Fraud Risk Analysis Network
EIBM  European integrated border management
EMPACT  European multidisciplinary platform against criminal threats
ETIAS  European Travel Information and Authorisation System
EU  European Union
EU+  27 EU Member States plus Norway and Switzerland
Eurodac  European Dactyloscopy 
Europol EU Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation (formerly European Police Office)
Eurostat  Statistical Office of the European Union
FRAN  Frontex Risk Analysis Network
Frontex  European Border and Coast Guard Agency (formerly European Agency for  
the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders  
of the Member States of the European Union)
FTF  foreign terrorist fighter
IBC  Illegal border-crossing
ICJ  International Court of Justice
ID  identification document
IDP  internally displaced person
IOM  International Organization for Migration
ISIS/ISIL/Daesh  Islamic State of Iraq and Syria
JO  Joint Operation
MS  EU Member State
NGO  non-governmental organisation
OCG  organised crime group
PPE  personal protective equipment
RDC  Return Data Collection
SAC  Schengen-Associated Country
SAR  search and rescue
SBC  Schengen Borders Code
UK  The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
UNHCR  United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
UNSCR  United Nations Security Council resolution
WCO  World Customs Organization
WHO  World Health Organization
5 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
1. Foreword
In a complex world engulfed in a once-
in-a-lifetime global crisis that has af-
fected every aspect of our lives, reliable 
intelligence has become an invaluable 
commodity. This is precisely why I am 
pleased to present the Risk Analysis for 2021, 
which not only paints a clear picture of 
the migratory trends and related indi-
cators, but also shows how the external 
borders have been affected by COVID-19.
2020 was already set to be the most 
challenging for Frontex, the European 
Border and Coast Guard Agency. The pre-
vious year had concluded with the new 
European Border and Coast Guard Reg-
ulation coming into force, giving the 
Agency new tools as well as new respon-
sibilities to become a fully-fledged and 
reliable partner for Member States at the 
external borders. The new regulation 
also set Frontex on the path to becoming 
the EU’s largest agency as a true law en-
forcement body with its own uniformed 
service – the European Border and Coast 
Guard standing corps. 
Such massive changes coupled with 
unprecedented growth and very ambi-
tious deadlines would represent an im-
mense challenge for any organisation. 
For Frontex, this also means expansion 
and continued recruitment without com-
promising on the quality of the selec-
tion process, including application of EU 
staff regulations, and operational sup-
port to the Member States that must not 
be interrupted.
If these challenges by themselves 
were not enough, for over a year now 
we all have had to cope with the disrup-
tions and limitations caused by a global 
pandemic. Despite it all, today we have 
recruited more than 500 members of 
the standing corps, with half of them 
already at their posts at the borders and 
our headquarters – contributing to our 
mission to protect the Area of Freedom, 
Security and Justice. Soon, more of the 
recruits will complete their training in 
Italy and Spain.
Another group of officers from na-
tional authorities who for the first time 
are seconded to Frontex activities as Cat-
egory 2 of the standing corps, are also on 
board and are contributing their exper-
tise and experience.
Amid COVID-19 Frontex not only 
maintained its key operations even as 
6 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
© Frontex 2021
©
 F
ro
n
te
x
air travel came to a virtual halt a year 
ago, the Agency also launched not one, 
but two rapid border interventions at 
Greece’s land and sea borders. This 
brought more officers and more techni-
cal equipment to support Greece in deal-
ing with rising migratory pressure at its 
borders, which, of course, are also the 
external borders of the EU.
The pandemic tested us all, but also 
encouraged us to come up with creative 
solutions that have proven useful in the 
deployment of the standing corps. These 
included expanded online training for 
the recruits and members of the border 
and coast guard community, as well as 
the creation of the first logistics base in 
Greece that is used to store and distrib-
ute personal protection equipment and 
other supplies to officers on the ground.
COVID-19 and related national meas-
ures, as well as the reintroduction of in-
ternal border controls, had a significant 
effect on the migratory picture at the ex-
ternal borders. These phenomena also 
affected cross-border crime, and its per-
petrators adapted to closed borders and 
more limited mobility.
Criminals also seized new oppor-
tunities, from smuggling counterfeit 
personal protective equipment to fake 
negative test certificates. This compre-
hensive document also discusses other 
border management challenges, such 
as the terrorist threat, detection of sto-
len vehicles and smuggling of firearms, 
drugs and cigarettes. Finally, we aim to 
provide an outlook for the short, medium 
and long term, as affected by COVID-19, 
as well as other factors that include de-
mographic imbalances, inequalities, 
climate change, resource scarcity, ur-
banisation and new technologies.
Of course, another key factor in Eu-
ropean Integrated Border Management 
will be the transformed Frontex, with 
increased resilience and new capaci-
ties, in large part thanks to the grow-
ing standing corps. Our Agency is now 
an operational partner supporting EU 
Member States and Schengen Associated 
Countries with a wide range of services 
presented in the Frontex Catalogue of 
Services with the aim to bring extraor-
dinary benefits for the functioning of 
the external borders to strengthen the 
free movement of hundreds of millions 
of Europeans, foreign residents and vis-
itors within the Area of Freedom, Se-
curity and Justice. I am confident that 
this Annual Risk Analysis for 2021 helps 
the Member States and Frontex to pre-
pare for the next challenges at the ex-
ternal borders. 
Fabrice Leggeri
Executive Director
7 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
2. Summary
Every aspect of European integrated bor-
der management in 2020 was dominated 
by the COVID-19 crisis. A leading indi-
cator is the sharp fall in passenger flows 
at the EU’s external borders, which de-
creased by more than two thirds com-
pared with 2019, against a constantly 
increasing trend in previous years. De-
tections of illegal border-crossing de-
creased by a much smaller fraction, 
reiterating the necessity to remain 
vigilant.
2020 will also be remembered as the 
year when internal border controls were 
reintroduced across Europe – a stark 
reminder to EU citizens of the historic 
achievement that the Schengen area of 
free movement represents. Border and 
coast guard authorities faced a human 
resource shortage (caused by high num-
bers of personnel on sick leave or quaran-
tined) in the context of a more complex 
operational environment. Although the 
number of passengers shrank, the com-
plexity of procedures at the borders, in-
cluding measures against the spread of 
the virus, increased. Refusals of entry on 
the basis of health grounds multiplied.
It can be reasonably expected that 2021 
will be a year of transition from the cur-
rent emergency to an uncertain new nor-
mal. In the short term, COVID-19 will 
continue to significantly affect travel 
across the EU’s external borders. Fac-
tors to be considered include:
 <U+25AA> The emergence of more resilient, in-
fectious coronavirus variants has 
clouded the path to recovery with 
uncertainty;
 <U+25AA> The occurrence of false vaccination 
certificates as travel enablers, the 
possibility of a rise in the smuggling 
of genuine, counterfeit or deterio-
rated vaccines, and that of COVID-
19-related medical supplies and/
or personal protective equipment 
(PPE), may put additional pressure on 
border management authorities; and 
 <U+25AA> Geographic fault lines between the 
vaccine haves and have-nots are 
likely to re-shape migratory routes 
and/or affect travellers’ flows.
In the medium term, the new Pact on 
Migration and Asylum presented by the 
European Commission on 23 September 
2020 provides a perspective for a more 
comprehensive policy for asylum and mi-
gration management. The introduction 
of key novelties, including but not lim-
ited to the Blueprint Network, as well as 
a new pre-entry screening mechanism, 
will contribute to enhancing the effec-
tiveness of EIBM.
It is realistic to assess that the im-
pact of migration, cross-border crime 
and terrorism against the backdrop of 
the consequences of the pandemic will 
continue to require comprehensive re-
sponses from all actors that have a role 
in European integrated border manage-
ment: the border and coast guard com-
munity is a significant but not the sole 
player in this. 
And in the long-term perspective, 
the implications of megatrends identi-
fied in the Agency’s foresight work – such 
as demographic imbalances, resource 
scarcity and climate change – will con-
tinue to provide the broad background 
on which to build an ever more effective 
European response to the challenges for 
the EIBM. 
The Agency assesses that:
 <U+25AA> The gradual lifting of internal border 
controls and the relaxation of preven-
tative measures at the borders as the 
pandemic recedes may cause organ-
ised crime groups (OCGs) to revert 
to modi operandi used in the pre-cri-
sis period;
 <U+25AA> The reactivation of traditional air 
routes will most likely lead to in-
creased migratory flows as it will 
ease (long-distance) travel, reduce 
cost, and decrease uncertainty. Air 
traffic trends will likely return to pre-
pandemic levels at least in the next 
two years, although this will depend 
on the recovery of the air transport 
industry and the progress of vacci-
nation programs; 
 <U+25AA> The smuggling of fake (COVID-19-re-
lated) medical products may persist 
as long as there is demand for vac-
cines and medicines in global and 
European markets;
 <U+25AA> The demand for smuggled goods in 
the EU will likely remain high in the 
post-pandemic period; 
 <U+25AA> Prolonged economic downturns in 
certain countries of origin and tran-
sit might act as a strong push fac-
tor for international migration; and
 <U+25AA> Increasing social inequalities and 
asymmetrical economic recoveries 
worldwide will likely contribute to 
an increase in cross-border crimi-
nality at the EU’s external borders.
As stated previously, in 2020 COVID-19 
has affected EIBM across the board.
With regard to irregular migra-
tion, the following are just four of the 
COVID-19-related phenomena that de-
fined 2020: 
 <U+25AA> The re-routing of migrants from the 
Western Mediterranean route to the 
Western African route; 
 <U+25AA> New modi operandi to avoid detection 
and subsequent quarantine (detected 
clandestine entry attempts in propor-
tion to overall cross-border passenger 
flows increased markedly); 
 <U+25AA> Increased migration from certain 
countries in Northwest Africa result-
ing from economic contraction; and
 <U+25AA> Nationality-specific pull factors due 
to the ceasing of readmissions. 
In spite of the pandemic countermeas-
ures in the EU and beyond, and consid-
ering the scale of movement restrictions, 
it may be surprising that in 2020 illegal 
border-crossings decreased by a mere 12% 
8 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
(2019)
2020
2 286
8 942
Detections of illegal
border-crossing at BCPs
Detections
of facilitators
(212 487)
131 439
Refusals
of entry
(2 550)
(10 989)
3 719
Detections 
of fraudulent 
document users
(5 228)
(139 377)
66 514
Returns
(eective)
Returns
(decisions)
316 140
(302 023)
(403 078)
(141 846)
125 226
Detections
of illegal
border-crossing
between BCPs
370 174
Detections
of persons
staying
illegally
Reported cases
Latest situation
2020
compared with 2019. The higher num-
ber of detections on the Central Medi-
terranean, Western Balkan and Western 
African routes should give us pause, as 
they suggest that migratory pressure 
on the EU is persisting. However, there 
was a decrease in the share of vulnerable 
groups. Women and children represented 
a smaller share of the overall migrant 
population arriving on EU shores in 2020.
Cross-border crime, too, was shaken 
up, as criminals had to adapt to var-
ying degrees of border closures. Some 
goods smuggling activities, for exam-
ple, shifted to sea routes. International 
criminals were also quick to seize new 
opportunities, from smuggling coun-
terfeit PPE to falsifying negative test 
certificates. ‘Traditional’ smuggling of 
excise goods, such as tobacco and alco-
hol, also responded to the demand cre-
ated by closed borders. 
If 2020 has demonstrated anything, then 
it is this: serious situations affecting bor-
der control can occur at any time, sud-
denly and without any obvious warning 
signs. The current pandemic has once 
again shown how important prepara-
tion, contingency planning, cooperation 
and crisis management are for the EBCG. 
While contingency planning is cru-
cial, so is early warning. The pandemic 
has demonstrated that health threats 
must be assessed more thoroughly than 
in the past. So far no definition of ‘health 
risk’ has been commonly agreed at EU 
level. A better understanding of how 
health risks are reported nationally is 
necessary for the EBCG to prepare a joint 
pre-warning system of future health-
related threats, in collaboration with 
the ECDC.
Return activities were profoundly af-
fected by the pandemic. While slightly 
more return decisions were issued in 
2020 compared with 2019, effective re-
turns fell significantly: the total number 
of effective returns carried out decreased 
by more than 50% (against 2019 figures). 
Annex Table 12 shows important changes 
in EU MS/SAC reporting on this indica-
tor. Discounting those, the fall in effec-
tive returns was still significant.
2020 also brought the issue of funda-
mental rights within the context of bor-
der management to the forefront of the 
debate at European and national lev-
els. Border and coast guards must iden-
tify vulnerable persons and persons in 
need of international protection, in some 
cases save them from being exploited by 
traffickers or smugglers, provide them 
with relevant information on their re-
spective rights, and refer them to the 
competent authority. Fast and efficient 
referrals to the relevant authorities en-
sure that the rights of vulnerable persons 
and the right to asylum are guaranteed 
in practice, as per Article 18 of the Char-
ter of Fundamental Rights of the Euro-
pean Union.
The deployment of the EBCG stand-
ing corps presents an opportunity to en-
sure access to international protection 
for those who need it, while upholding 
well-functioning external borders in line 
with the Schengen Borders Code.
Source: FRAN data as of 15 February 2021
9 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
© Frontex, 2019 – Floriana Segreto
3. Introduction
The Frontex Risk Analysis for 2021 re-
ports on all aspects relevant for Euro-
pean Integrated Border Management. 
In tracing the described developments 
of 2020, readers will notice that not a 
single aspect was untouched by the 
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Re-
strictions on movements, border clo-
sures and other far-reaching COVID-19 
countermeasures impacted all catego-
ries of cross-border movements, be it 
tourism, business travel or irregular 
migration. One threat (that to public 
health) shaped all other threats as every 
associated chapter will attest to. Bor-
der management in the service of mit-
igating this threat in turn profoundly 
impacted migration management and 
return. Developments and threats to the 
security of the EU’s external border and 
the Schengen area are analyzed in this 
report. The aim is to limit the challenges 
and threats for border management by 
risk analysis and to ensure the function-
ing of the Schengen area. 
Frontex’s operational activities aim at 
strengthening border security by support-
ing Member States in their implementa-
tion of EU measures for the management 
of external borders. 
The coordination of operational activi-
ties contributes to a more efficient alloca-
tion of Member States’ resources as well as 
the better protection of the European area 
of freedom, security and justice. In this 
context, this Risk Analysis concentrates 
on the scope of Frontex’s operational ac-
tivities and, in particular, on irregular 
migration at the external borders of the 
EU and Schengen Associated Countries. 
Regulation (EU) 2016/1624 signifi-
cantly enhanced Frontex’s mandate to 
ensure the efficient implementation of 
European Integrated Border Management 
as a shared responsibility of the Union, 
the Agency and national authorities of 
the Member States. More recently, Reg-
ulation (EU) 2019/1896 further reinforced 
the Agency’s mandate and increased its 
competences. 
In order to cover all aspects of Inte-
grated Border Management, this annual 
report has been structured as follows: (1) 
the situational picture for the European 
Border and Coast Guard as regards irregu-
lar migration in accordance with the con-
cept of Integrated Border Management; 
followed by (2) a description of other bor-
der management challenges impacting 
the workload of border guards caused by 
passenger flows, terrorism and various 
forms of cross-border crime; and finally 
(3) an outlook. 
10 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
4. Methodology
The Common Integrated Risk Analysis 
Model (CIRAM) guides the overall report 
and covers the entire scope of integrated 
border management. 
A coherent and comprehensive analy-
sis of the risks affecting security at the 
external borders requires, above all, the 
adoption of common indicators. The 
analysis needs to iden tify the risks that 
arise at the external borders themselves 
and those that arise in third countries.
This Risk Analysis for 2021 is based 
upon the monthly statistics exchanged 
among Member States within the frame-
work of the Frontex Risk Analysis Net-
work (FRAN). For this, the key indicators 
col lected through the FRAN (as well as 
EDF-RAN and RDC) were: 
 <U+25AA> detections of illegal border-crossings 
at green and blue borders and at BCPs; 
 <U+25AA> refusals of entry; 
 <U+25AA> detections of illegal stay; 
 <U+25AA> detections of facilitators; 
 <U+25AA> detections of fraudulent documents; 
 <U+25AA> return decisions; 
 <U+25AA> effective returns and passenger flow 
data (when available).
In particular for cross-border crime anal-
ysis, EUROSUR incident reports were 
considered. Concerning applications 
for interna tional protection, in order to 
avoid dou ble reporting, Frontex stopped 
collecting asylum data from EU MS/SAC 
in July 2019 and since then only works 
with data collected by EASO.
The data were categorised by border 
type (land, air or sea), and those on land 
borders were additionally grouped by 
border section with neighbouring third 
countries. Priority is given to the use of 
the data for management purposes and 
to rapidly sharing data among Mem ber 
State border-control authorities.
Member States’ data processed by 
Frontex are not treated as official statis-
tics and thus may occasionally vary from 
those officially published by national au-
thorities. Throughout 2020, some FRAN 
members made backdated changes to 
their 2019 statistics. These changes have 
been incorporated into this document, 
hence some data presented here may 
diff er from those presented a year ago 
in the Risk Analysis for 2020.
Member States were not requested 
to answer specific questions in support 
of this analysis. Rather, bimonthly 
ana lytical reports and incident reports 
from Member States routinely collected 
within the FRAN, as well as other Mem-
ber States’ contributions submitted in 
2020, were used, especially as regards the 
analysis of routes and modi operandi. In-
formation de rived from debriefing activ-
ities carried out within Joint Operations 
was also es sential analytical material. 
Open-source information was also 
ex ploited, especially in identifying the 
main ‘push and pull factors’ for irregu-
lar mi gration to the EU. These sources 
included reports issued by government 
agencies, international and non-govern-
mental or ganisations, as well as main-
stream news agencies and EU bodies. 
External borders, a term often used in 
this report, refer to the borders between 
Member States and third countries. The 
borders between the Schengen Associ-
ated Countries (Norway, Iceland, and 
Switzer land) and third countries are also 
consid ered as external borders. By con-
trast, the borders between the Schen-
gen Associated Countries and Schengen 
Member States are considered as inter-
nal borders. Sta tistics on detections of 
facilitators and illegal stay and asylum 
are also reported at the land borders 
between Schengen Member States and 
Member States that have either not yet 
joined the Schengen area in full (Bul-
garia, Croatia, Cyprus, Romania) or have 
opted to stay out of it (Ireland). Thus, to-
tal figures for Member States and Schen-
gen Associated Coun tries as a whole can 
be presented. 
It was not possible to make the dis-
tinction for air and sea borders because 
Member States do not habitually differ-
entiate between extra-EU and intra-EU 
air and sea connections, but tend to ag-
gregate data for all arrivals per airport/ 
seaport. Consistent with other law-
en forcement indicators, variations in 
ad ministrative data related to border 
control depend on several factors. In this 
case, the number of detections of ille-
gal border-crossings and refusals of en-
try are both functions of the amount of 
effort spent, respectively, on detecting 
migrants and the actual flow of irreg-
ular migrants to the EU. For example, 
increased detec tions of illegal border-
crossing might be due to a real increase 
in the flow of ir regular migrants, or may 
be due to more resources made availa-
ble to detect them. In exceptional cases, 
increased resources may lead to a rise 
in reported detections while effectively 
masking an actual de crease in the mi-
gratory flow, resulting from the deter-
rent effect of those in creased resources.
11 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021

© Frontex, 2020
5.  Migratory Flow
Black Sea route
0
(2)
Eastern Borders route
677
(722)
Western African route
23 029
(2 718)
Detections of illegal border- 
crossing at the EU’s external 
borders, 2020
125 226
Western Mediterranean route
17 228
(23 969)
Algeria 11 457
Morocco 3 528
Unspec. 
sub-Saharan 
nationals 2 008
Morocco 11 759
Unspec. 
sub-Saharan 
nationals 10 620
Mali 290
Eastern Mediterranean route
20 283
(83 333)
Syria 4 669
Afghanistan 3 876
Turkey 3 660
Route
in 2020
(in 2019)
Top three nationalities
Syria      14 378
Morocco   13 269
Afghanistan 12 666
Western Balkan route
26 969
(15 152)
Syria 16 644
Afghanistan 5 251
Iraq 749
Circular route from 
Albania to Greece
1 365
(1 944)
Central Mediterranean route
35 673
(14 003)
Tunisia 12 985
Bangladesh 4 447
Côte d'Ivoire 2 065
(141 846 in 2019)
Source: FRAN data as of 15 February 2021
14 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
5.1 Situational Overview
In 2020, just over 125 000 detections of 
illegal border-crossings (IBC) were re-
corded along the EU’s external borders, 
according to EU MS/SAC data. This rep-
resents a 12% decrease on the number of 
detections recorded in 2019. It is the low-
est recorded number of IBCs since 2013. 
The decrease in 2020 primarily re-
sulted from the drastic drop in arrivals 
due to the impact of COVID-19-related 
movement restrictions, which were im-
posed from March onwards. Linked to 
this and part and parcel of the decrease 
in the 2020 total was the prolonged re-
duction in detections on the Eastern 
Mediterranean route. Given the strongly 
increasing pressure before the onset of 
the pandemic and the higher number 
of detections on the Central Mediter-
ranean, Western Balkan and Western 
African routes, the relative decrease com-
pared with 2019 could arguably have been 
an increase but for COVID-19. 
2020 saw a decrease in the share of 
vulnerable groups in migration flows 
entering EU MS/SAC. As most female 
migrants travel to EU MS/SAC on the 
Eastern Mediterranean route, the large 
drop in arrivals on this route contributed 
significantly to the overall fall in female 
arrivals from 23% in 2019 to around 8% 
in 2020. Likewise, most minors travel 
on the Eastern Mediterranean route – 
often as part of family units – and their 
overall decreased share was therefore 
equally a consequence of the fall in arriv-
als on the Eastern Mediterranean route. 
While some of the data on arrivals does 
not distinguish between age, the num-
ber of reported minors fell from around 
23% in 2019 to around 11% in 2020 (pre-
liminary data). On the other hand, the 
proportion of male migrants arriving 
in EU MS/SAC in 2020 was significantly 
higher than in 2019.
The fall in arrivals on the Eastern Med-
iterranean route was also behind the 
marked decrease in migrant arrivals from 
Southern Asia and the Middle East for 
the overall external borders. North Afri-
can arrivals on the other hand increased 
in 2020 to their highest level since 2011. 
The largest contribution to this increase 
was made by Tunisians. Algerians, too, 
arrived in higher numbers, mostly tak-
ing the Western Mediterranean route, 
but their numbers also increased on the 
Central Mediterranean route. There were 
also more Moroccans, but while their 
numbers decreased on the Western Medi-
terranean route, their arrivals multiplied 
on the Western African route. 
Rapid Border Intervention Evros 2020, © Frontex, 2020
15 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
On the Eastern Mediterranean route, 
2020 began with strong pressure.Corre-
sponding to this, two Frontex rapid bor-
der interventions assisted Greek border 
management until the fall of 2020. The 
COVID-19 containment measures in both 
Greece and Turkey then substantially 
reduced migrant arrivals, but the pres-
sure gradually began rising again after 
April, although it stayed relatively low 
compared to previous years. 
In the Eastern Aegean, movement re-
strictions on account of the pandemic 
reduced flows to almost zero landings 
on the Greek hotspot islands. Thereaf-
ter arrivals increased but at historically 
low levels: in the second half of the year 
fewer migrants arrived than in a single 
month at the beginning of the year. Af-
ghans and Syrians were again the most 
reported nationalities by some distance. 
Together they accounted for well over 
half of all arrivals. 
In Cyprus, too, detections after the 
‘COVID-shock’ did not return to compa-
rable levels seen in 2019. 
After the first quarter of 2020 started 
with high migratory pressure at the ex-
ternal borders to the Western Balkans, 
this pressure quickly subsided due to 
COVID-19 countermeasures. As migrants 
in the Western Balkans were confined 
to a large extent to migrant camps, 
these countermeasures more strongly 
restricted the movements of the over-
all migrant population here than can 
be said for other regions.
After April the number of migrants 
reaching the neighbouring northern EU 
MS increased again, coinciding with re-
stored mobility as COVID-19 restrictions 
were eased. Whereas Syrians represented 
a large share, migrant arrivals from all 
the Northwest African countries also in-
creased markedly. 
While migrants already in the West-
ern Balkans region were likely the main 
contributors to the rising number of at-
tempts on the region’s northern borders, 
there were also new arrivals, as reflected 
by the significant pressure on entry to 
the region from the south. As such, non-
regional migration in the Western Bal-
kans in 2020 continued to be strongly 
connected to the Eastern Mediterranean 
migrant flow. The most important devel-
opment in the routing through the re-
gion in 2020 was the increased routing 
of migrants northwards via Albania to 
Serbia via Kosovo1 starting early 2020.
1 This designation is without prejudice to 
positions on status, and is in line with 
UNSCR 1244 and the ICJ Opinion on the 
Kosovo* declaration of independence.
In this region, too, migrants sought 
to avoid detection and quarantine. At 
the borders of Croatia, Hungary and Ro-
mania with Serbia, around 1 600 clan-
destine entry attempts were recorded, 
a decrease in absolute numbers compared 
with 2019 yet a strong increase compared 
with the much-reduced passenger flow. 
Indeed, considering the absolute num-
bers, in the second half of 2020 (when 
cross-border traffic recovered) detections 
of clandestine entry attempts increased. 
Widely reported in the media were the 
use of several tunnels for the smuggling 
of migrants at the Serbian border. 
At the Croatian border with Bosnia 
and Herzegovina, clandestine entry de-
tections multiplied in the second half of 
the year (compared again to the second 
half of 2019). Whereas at the borders with 
Serbia most clandestine entry attempts 
were attributed to Afghans, at the bor-
der with Bosnia and Herzegovina, the re-
ported nationalities were more diverse. 
At both border sections, migrants tended 
to hide in or under lorries. 
Italy-Sea
Croatia-Serbia
Hungary-Serbia
Croatia-Bosnia&Herzegovina
2 286 (2 550)
Number in parenthesis is for 2019
Detections of illegal border-crossing at BCPs
by border section  (people hiding in vehicles), 2020
(only values higher than 200 are stipulated)
200
Source: FRAN data as of 15 February 2021
16 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
After the pandemic took hold, detec-
tions in the Central Mediterranean fell 
steeply to 375 in March. The pressure 
rose significantly in the summer, mak-
ing the Central Mediterranean route the 
most used, with around 35 700 IBCs (a 
155% increase on 2019). 
While departures from Libya, Alge-
ria and Turkey all contributed to the in-
crease, the highest relative increase in 
arrivals emanated from Tunisia, with 
around 14 700 IBCs (87% Tunisians mak-
ing this the most detected nationality 
on this corridor). Other than Tunisians 
themselves, more Ivorians and Guine-
ans also departed from Tunisia. From 
Libya, Bangladeshi, Sudanese, Moroc-
can, Somali and Eritrean migrants were 
the most numerous.
Simultaneous departures and the use 
of mother boats were common modi oper-
andi on the corridor from Tunisia. The use 
of speedboats was reported to smuggle 
migrants on the Tunisian corridor, too. 
Smuggling networks in Libya had to 
adapt their modi operandi, organising de-
partures in better quality and less over-
crowded vessels aiming to sail longer 
distances due to the enduring presence 
of maritime assets off the Libyan coast. 
According to the UNHCR, the Libyan 
Coast Guard reportedly rescued over 11 000 
migrants at sea in 2020, representing 
an increase of about a quarter compared 
to 2019.
Notably, although there were no arriv-
als registered until June on this corridor 
towards the Central Mediterranean, the 
number of arrivals from Turkey increased 
in 2020 to roughly 4 200 migrants, which 
is more than double the figure recorded 
in 2019 (almost 2 000 migrants). This is 
a continuing trend but one which was 
accentuated by the COVID-19 situation 
in 2020. Smuggling networks in Turkey 
reverted to their well-established mo-
dus operandi on this corridor, i.e. facili-
tating migrant crossings aboard sailing 
vessels or motor yachts. In some cases 
large fishing vessels were used to smug-
gle migrants.
After April 2020, when coordinated pa-
trolling efforts in Morocco and COVID-19 
countermeasures throughout Northwest 
Africa brought detected illegal border-
crossings on the Western Mediterra-
nean route down to 168, detections 
started rising again during the sum-
mer. By the end of 2020, over 17 200 mi-
grants had been detected, a decrease of 
28% on 2019. 
Departures from Algeria occurred in 
significant numbers much earlier in the 
year than in previous years and almost 
tripled compared to 2019. In addition, 
almost 5 000 Algerian nationals departed 
from Morocco, more than twice the num-
ber in 2019. On the other hand arrivals 
from Morocco on this route fell. 
On the Western Mediterranean route 
a variety of means were used by smug-
gling networks in 2020. On the Atlantic 
corridor the vast majority of detected mi-
grant boats were wooden fishing vessels, 
generally skippered by a smuggler. In the 
Strait of Gibraltar, smaller craft such as 
toy boats, kayaks and jet skis were pri-
marily used in the crossing. Occasion-
ally, the crossings were supported by 
‘mother boats’ (larger vessels that launch 
smaller boats such as toy boats, typically 
from international waters). On the cor-
ridor in the Alboran Sea, rubber or fiber-
glass boats, with low power engines, 
were mostly used in the crossing. On the 
corridor from Algeria, smuggling net-
works chiefly facilitated crossings aboard 
rubber or fiberglass boats with medium 
power engines, however towards the end 
of 2020 crossings aboard ‘taxi boats’ (fast 
boats that directly drop migrants off at 
the coastline) significantly increased. 
These crossings are more expensive and 
utilise high-speed and quality vessels, 
whose main purpose is to avoid detec-
tion and interception. 
In 2020, COVID-19 movement restric-
tions in Morocco, among other factors, 
1000
Netherlands
France
Spain
Italy
Air
Germany
26 208 (62 859)
Number in parenthesis is for 2019
1000
Italy
Sea
2 782 (4 129)
Number in parenthesis is for 2019
5000
Poland
Hungary Romania
Croatia
Lithuania
Land 
Refusals of entry per border type, 2020
(only values higher than 1000 are stipulated)
102 448 (145 494)
Number in parenthesis is for 2019
2019
Land
Trend of the total   
2020
Air
26 208
62 859
Sea
2 782
4 129
102 448
145 494
So
ur
ce
: F
RA
N 
da
ta
 as
 o
f 1
5 
Fe
br
ua
ry
 2
02
1
Refusals of entry per border type, 2020
(only values higher than 1000 are stipulated) 
17 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
diverted flows onto the Western African 
route. Due to COVID-19 countermeas-
ures in Northwest African countries, 
Sub-Saharan migrants assessed the 
chances of success of reaching the EU 
via the Western Mediterranean route 
as low and chose the Western African 
route as an alternative, which was re-
activated as a result. Human smugglers 
have adapted to the demand and set up 
appropriate logistics for the smuggling 
to the Canary Islands. As a result, more 
and more migrants – also from the north-
ern African countries – chose this route, 
which, however, is longer and more dan-
gerous compared to the Western Medi-
terranean route. The number of arrivals 
on this route was around 23 000 in 2020 
– over eight times the number in 2019. 
Arrivals increased exponentially in the 
last third of the year, also due to the use 
of large fishing vessels (‘cayucos’) with 
large passenger capacities (able to carry 
up to 200 migrants). Overall, roughly 
three quarters of all migrants in 2020 on 
this route departed from Morocco and 
the Western Sahara region, with the 
rest mostly departing from Senegal and 
very few from Mauritania. Up until Au-
gust, the migrants who were targeting 
the Canary Islands were predominantly 
sub-Saharan migrants. In September a 
sharp increase in Moroccan nationals 
was detected primarily departing from 
the Western Sahara region. Of all appre-
hensions on the Canary Islands in 2020, 
it is estimated that roughly half were Mo-
roccan and the other half sub-Saharan. 
On Europe’s Eastern land borders, the 
overall number of illegal border-cross-
ings decreased by 6% in 2020. There were 
small absolute increases in arrivals from 
Belarus and Moldova, but at low levels. 
In either case the additional detections 
did not involve nationals of the corre-
sponding countries. The number of re-
ported clandestine entry attempts was 
negligible. Notably, the political insta-
bility in Belarus had no significant im-
pact on the EU’s external borders. 
In 2020 again a large share of refus-
als was issued to migrants at the East-
ern land borders. In terms of refusals, 
two opposing trends occurred: on the 
one hand the share of passengers refused 
entry based on standard categories de-
creased significantly (on account of the 
drastic decrease in passenger flows due to 
movement restrictions caused by the pan-
demic), while on the other hand a larger 
share of passengers were refused entry 
on health grounds. At the land borders 
with Russia, Belarus, Ukraine and Mol-
dova the number of refusals decreased 
from around 114 000 to roughly 74 000. 
At the same time, refusals in category I 
(refusals based on a passenger constitut-
ing a threat to public policy, internal se-
curity, public health or the international 
relations of one or more Member States 
of the European Union) at these border 
sections increased from approximately 
2 900 in 2019 to 12 000 in 2020. At the 
external borders, refusals in category I, 
which crucially includes refusals based 
on health threats, increased sixfold to al-
most 25 000 cases. In other categories, 
fewer refusals were issued as a function 
of the reduced passenger flow. 
The number of migrants attempting 
to cross to or succeeding in reaching the 
UK across the English Channel signifi-
cantly increased in 2020. Simultaneous 
departures took place at high speed to 
increase the likelihood of avoiding in-
terception. According to Europol, the 
main modus operandi involved the use of 
small boats (Rigid Inflatable Boats or 
Rigid Hull Inflatable Boats) from the EU 
to the UK in 2020.2 
On the circular route to Greece, de-
tections again decreased. Virtually all 
(97%) of detected illegal border-crossings 
were by Albanian nationals. 
2 Europol, European Union Serious and 
Organised Crime Threat Assessment 
(EU SOCTA) 2021.
18 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
5.2 Facilitation of Irregular Migration
Member States in 2020 reported 8 942 
detected people smugglers to Frontex. 
Around half of them were reported at 
the external border and the other half 
inland. The decrease of 19% compared 
with the 2019 total is almost exclusively 
a result of fewer reported detections at 
the external border and is linked to the 
reduced migratory flow as previously 
described. 
Importantly, in 2020 the COVID-19 
crisis meant that the demand for un-
detected smuggling into the EU rose 
as the prospect of avoiding quarantine 
in reception facilities was coveted. In 
this regard, Frontex debriefings suggest 
that smugglers demanded and achieved 
higher prices as a result. 
According to Europol, migrant smug-
gling is and will remain a key activity for 
criminal networks, sustained by contin-
ued demand for facilitation services.1 
Criminal networks involved in mi-
grant smuggling are characterised by 
agility and responsiveness to changes 
1 Europol, European Union Serious and 
Organised Crime Threat Assessment 
(EU SOCTA) 2021, accessible at https://
www.europol.europa.eu/socta-report
in their environment. The routes and 
modi operandi used by smugglers to facil-
itate migrants to and within the EU/
SACs are flexible and shift depending 
on circumstances such as weather con-
ditions, availability of transport logis-
tics and the presence of risks such as 
increased law enforcement activity or 
travel restrictions. The COVID-19 pan-
demic has highlighted that global cri-
ses do not in the long run significantly 
disrupt migration flows and do not di-
minish the demand for smuggling ser-
vices to enter, transit or reside in the 
EU MS/SAC. After an initial slow-down 
during the first lockdown in March and 
April 2020, migrant smuggling activities 
quickly resumed. To compensate for po-
tential economic losses, smuggling net-
works were forced to seek alternatives in 
routes, mode of transportation, and size 
of smuggled groups.2 
2 Europol 2020, How COVID-19-related 
crime infected Europe during 2020 
[Report, 12 November 2020], accessible 
at https://www.europol.europa.eu/
publications-documents/how-covid-
19-related-crime-infected-europe-
during-2020
The resourcefulness of criminal net-
works capitalising on irregular migrants’ 
willingness to reach their preferred des-
tination, paying high fees and taking 
significant risks, has been validated by 
some examples in 2020. Facilitation by 
air usually entails high prices including 
supply of fraudulent documents, such as 
identity documents, short-stay Schengen 
visas or national long-stay visas, either 
counterfeited or fraudulently obtained. 
Migrant smuggling is the process 
of facilitating the unlawful entry, 
transit or residence of an individual in 
a country with or without obtaining 
financial or other benefits. Migrant 
smuggling entails the facilitation of 
illegal entry to the EU and Schengen-
associated countries (SAC) and of 
secondary movements within the 
EU MS/SAC. It can also involve 
facilitating the fraudulent acquisition of 
a residence status in the EU MS/SAC. 
Migrant smuggling may entail land, sea 
or air transportation and often involves 
the use of fraudulent documents 
including identity documents or 
fraudulent visas.
© Frontex, 2019 – Kenneth Rosenqvsts
© Frontex, 2020
19 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
In 2020, facilitation by air routes mak-
ing use of private charter flights has been 
detected occasionally.3 
The heads of smuggling networks 
have solid managerial skills and are able 
to orchestrate the criminal business from 
a distance, while mostly exposing low-
level criminals involved in transport and 
logistics to law enforcement detection. 
Experts in document forging and in leg-
islation are often involved in a crime-
as-a-service type of cooperation. Highly 
organised smuggling networks also have 
connections or internal capabilities to ex-
ploit irregular migrants after they have 
arrived at their destination, through a 
debt bondage, highlighting the close 
link between migrant smuggling and 
trafficking in human beings.4
3 Europol, European Union Serious and 
Organised Crime Threat Assessment 
(EU SOCTA) 2021, accessible at https://
www.europol.europa.eu/socta-report; 
Infomigrants.net 2020, Iraqi family 
trafficked to Munich with private 
jet [Published on 14 October 2020], 
accessible at https://www.infomigrants.
net/en/post/27918/iraqi-family-trafficked-
to-munich-with-private-jet.
4 Europol SOCTA, ibid.
Migrant smuggling criminal net-
works treat irregular migrants as com-
modities and increasingly endanger 
their lives and physical integrity, aim-
ing at maximising profits and reducing 
time and operational costs. The practice 
of using unseaworthy vessels or conceal-
ment in small confined spaces for pro-
longed periods puts irregular migrants’ 
lives at risk and every year, many ir-
regular migrants perish during facilita-
tion attempts to and within the EU and 
the Schengen area. In addition to reck-
less modi operandi, migrant smugglers fre-
quently employ violence or the threat of 
violence against migrants, often to en-
sure their compliance or force them to 
pay the smuggling fees. They also em-
ploy violence against law enforcement 
officers when avoiding apprehension 
and occasionally against other smug-
glers active in the same area.5
5 Europol SOCTA, ibid.
Detections of people smugglers ('facilitators')  
reported at the external border by place of detection
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
2020201920182017
Air
Sea
Land
Inland
Not available
Source: FRAN data as of 15 February 2021
Eastern
Mediterranean
Syria
Palestine*
Turkey
Iraq Iran
Afghanistan
Pakistan
Bangladesh
Source: FRAN data as of 15 February 2021
20 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
Regions particularly impacting 
the Eastern Mediterranean 
route, the Western Balkans and 
to a certain extent the Eastern 
European land borders
Migratory pressure on the Eastern Med-
iterranean route, the Western Balkans 
and to a certain extent the Eastern Euro-
pean land borders remains a function of 
developments in the main origin, host 
and transit countries in the Middle East, 
central and south Asia, and the Com-
monwealth of Independent States (CIS). 
Overall, 2020 was an atypical year 
in which global slowdowns due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic, lower oil demand 
and prices, and even economic sanc-
tions exerted downward pressure on 
the economies of many countries. The 
World Bank estimates that the pandemic 
pushed an additional 88 to 115 million 
people worldwide into extreme pov-
erty, with the total rising to as many 
as 150 million in 2021, depending on the 
severity of the economic contraction. 
This will probably affect global migra-
tion for years to come.
5.3 Third Country Overview
Origins of migrants recorded  
on indicated route for IBC in 2020 
(only values higher than 100 are stipulated) 
*  This designation shall not be construed as recognition of  
a State of Palestine and is without prejudice to the individual 
positions of the Member States on this issue.
In 2020, these economic pressures 
added to the continued instability and 
insecurity in key regions of origin of 
migrants, likely pushing many to re-
consider their future livelihood options 
and search for security and protection. 
However, the travel restrictions 
imposed in response to the COVID-19 
pandemic appear to have limited the 
movement options of would-be migrants. 
It also appears that there have been re-
patriations of foreign workers from tra-
ditional host countries, often facilitated 
by governments in countries of origin in 
a context where many lost their jobs in 
foreign host countries. E.g. over 200 000 
Bangladeshi nationals had reportedly re-
turned from the Gulf Cooperation Council 
states by March 2020. At the same time, 
new departures, legal or illegal, were 
likely hindered by international travel 
restrictions and uncertainties related to 
the pandemic, keeping migratory move-
ments somewhat in check.
For example, at the height of the 
COVID-19 travel restrictions, migra-
tory pressure clearly decreased in areas 
where Frontex data collection allowed 
clear measurements. In this sense, while 
migrants already en-route to or present 
in neighbouring host countries contin-
ued to maintain a certain level of pres-
sure on key border sections in the Eastern 
Mediterranean and the Western Balkans, 
others from more distant locations likely 
encountered greater difficulties in travel-
ling to these regions. This, however, does 
not exclude a delayed reflection of the 
abovementioned push factors through 
increased migration to these regions in 
the coming months and years.
The impact of vaccinations, which 
promise to end the pandemic, will be 
key to reopenings here, too, and may 
route these onward movements via those 
transit countries with successful vacci-
nation strategies.
Methodological Note
Regions of origin are considered based 
on their evaluated potential as a re-
gion of origin and/or of transit for ille-
gal immigration and their geographic 
proximity to the EU. The top migrant 
nationalities detected at the EU ex-
ternal borders either originate from or 
transit through these regions. Factors 
such as the availability of legal and il-
legal travel options to and from these 
regions, institutional efforts to man-
age migration, the socio-economic 
and political stability are among the 
key elements considered when se-
lecting and assessing the most rele-
vant regions.
Eritrea
Mali
Burkina
Faso
Tunisia
Libya
Chad
Egypt
Sudan
Somalia
Guinea
Cameroon
Nigeria
Côte
d'Ivoire Ghana
Sierra Leone
Gambia
Senegal
Algeria
Morocco
Central
Mediterranean
Western
Mediterranean
Western
African
Unspecified 
sub-Saharan 
nationals
Origins of migrants recorded 
on indicated route for IBC in 2020  
(only values higher than 100 are stipulated) 
Source: FRAN data as of 15 February 2021
21 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
Regions particularly impacting 
the Central and Western 
Mediterranean, and Western 
African routes 
Migratory pressure on the Central and 
Western Mediterranean, and Western 
African routes remains a function of 
the developments and migration man-
agement efforts in the main origin, host 
and last departure countries in West and 
North Africa and the Horn of Africa.
Economic fallout from the COVID-19 
pandemic has badly affected the Afri-
can continent. The Economist Intelli-
gence Unit projected that regional Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) would contract 
sharply, with almost all countries fac-
ing recession in 2020 and millions fall-
ing into poverty. Previously fast-growing 
sectors, including consumer goods and 
service industries, have suffered unex-
pected losses. Many more people are ex-
pected to fall into poverty than escape it 
for the first time in decades, which is a 
clear warning. The World Bank projects 
that economic activity in all regions of 
Africa will have declined. Experts expect 
the return to growth will be swift when 
it happens, but recovery will be subdued 
in 2021, which will do little to ease the fi-
nancial pressures on African households, 
businesses and governments.
Economic growth was hit by a com-
bination of the domestic and interna-
tional policy measures to prevent the 
spread of COVID-19. Oil exporters expe-
rienced reduced demand for hydrocar-
bon products and thus reduced revenue. 
Similarly, major mining countries will 
suffer from soft demand in major export 
markets, low energy commodities’ prices 
and delayed investment plans by inter-
national mining companies.
As regards population growth in Africa, 
1.1 billion people live in the sub-Saharan 
countries, a region growing by roughly 
2.7% each year – the fastest growing re-
gion in the world. The average age of the 
population is relatively low. In 2019, 42% of 
sub-Saharan people belonged to the 0–14 
age group. If the growth rate remains at 
the same level, the population of the sub-
Saharan countries will double by 2050 and 
half of them will be below the age of 25.1
1 World Bank
Security issues also affect vast regions 
of Africa. A continued rise in insurgen-
cies and spill-overs into previously unaf-
fected regions of West Africa continued 
to be observed in 2020.
22 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
5.4 Fraudulent Documents
Overall situation
In 2020, the overall use of fraudulent 
documents as reported within the Euro-
pean Union Document Fraud Risk Anal-
ysis Network (EDF-RAN) decreased by 
nearly 50% in relation to 2019. EU MS/
SAC reported over 16 000 fraudulent doc-
ument users in 2020, which represents a 
record low since official EDF data collec-
tion from all EU MS/SAC began in 2013. 
This is linked to the pandemic-related 
drop in passenger flow. Another aspect 
partly influencing the overall lower num-
ber of document fraud cases detected 
and reported in 2020 concerned Brexit 
and the suspension of data collection 
from the UK. 
Situation at the EU’s 
external borders
Nearly 7 000 document fraud users were 
reported at the EU’s external borders in 
2020, which is similar to figures in 2019. 
However, Brexit means detections to-
wards the UK that were previously cate-
gorised as intra-EU/Schengen secondary 
movements are now reported as detec-
tions on exit to a third country at the ex-
ternal borders. Therefore, if detections 
towards the UK were excluded, the to-
tal number of detected users of fraudu-
lent documents in 2020 would be around 
one third lower.
When taking into account different 
border types, in particular air and land 
borders, the situation with detected 
fraudulent documents varied greatly. 
While restrictions at the EU’s external 
borders reduced air traffic by nearly 60% 
and thus lowered the number of doc-
ument fraud users detected at the air 
borders, land border document fraud de-
tections on the other hand increased de-
spite low passenger flows. The increase 
in document fraud detections at the ex-
ternal EU land borders was caused by 
an increase in the number of fraudu-
lent supporting documents, which were 
presented by migrants wishing to prove 
the necessity for crossing the borders 
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Those 
documents were often reported from 
the Polish-Ukrainian land border sec-
tion in the hands of Ukrainian and also 
Moldovan nationals. One newer mo-
dus operandi linked to illegal crossings of 
the EU’s Eastern external land borders 
was observed in the case of Russians of 
Chechen origin who were often detected 
using counterfeit residence permits. 
Ukrainian, Albanian and Turkish 
nationals ranked top at the EU’s 
external borders
Ukrainian nationals (1 521) became the 
most commonly detected nationality of 
suspects of document fraud at the EU’s 
external borders, especially due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic and restrictions at 
the borders which required possession 
of additional supporting documents 
proving the necessity for the border 
crossing. This led many Ukrainian na-
tionals to use fraudulent supporting 
documents. 
Albanian nationals (1 272) were the 
second most commonly detected nation-
ality at the EU’s external borders. The vast 
majority of them were detected on routes 
towards the UK. As in previous years, 
they mostly used counterfeit ID cards.
© Frontex, 2020
23 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
Turkish nationals (394) were the third 
most commonly detected at the EU’s ex-
ternal borders. They were mostly de-
tected on air routes on entry to EU MS/
SAC from Turkey.
Situation concerning 
intra-EU/Schengen secondary 
movements
In 2020, the number of fraudulent docu-
ment users detected on secondary move-
ments within the EU/Schengen area 
(over 8 100 fraudulent document users 
in possession of nearly 10 000 fraudu-
lent documents) significantly decreased 
by 63% compared to 2019. This figure of 
8 100 constitutes a record low since offi-
cial EDF data collection from all EU MS/
SAC began in 2013. This development was 
again caused by the COVID-19 outbreak 
but also by the fact that all travel towards 
the UK was newly classified as ‘on exit to 
a third country’ instead of detections on 
secondary movements between the EU/
Schengen area and the UK. Most cases 
were detected on air routes, in particular 
between Greece and other EU MS/SAC. 
The number of migrants attempting 
to depart Greece with fraudulent docu-
ments remained high despite the overall 
decrease caused by the COVID-19 pan-
demic. Furthermore, Malta recorded an 
increase from 180 document fraud cases 
in 2019 to 320 cases in 2020. As regards 
main nationalities, Syrian, Turkish and 
Afghan nationals accounted for nearly 
half of all document fraudsters stopped 
on intra-EU/Schengen movements in 
2020. Counterfeit EU ID cards were the 
most frequently misused. 
Persons using fraudulent documents on entry from third countries per border type
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
2017 2018 2019 2020
AIR
SEA
LAND
Source: EDF-RAN data as of 15 February 2021
In 2018, the Agency launched the Centre of Excellence for Combatting 
Document Fraud. The Centre’s aim is to maximize EU Member States and third 
countries operational capabilities in combating document fraud and related 
cross-border crimes in Frontex operations at external air-, land- and sea-
borders. Its mission is to emphasize Frontex expertise in identity and travel 
document fraud, pursuing operational excellence for the benefit of border 
guards and law enforcement. This Centre is the primary entity for supporting 
operational response and coordination of field activities against document fraud, 
providing close to real time support to border guards and other law enforcement 
bodies, and developing existing/new products and services to satisfy their 
operational needs.
Return decisions in 2020: 316 140
Eective returns in 2020: 66 514
Return decisions
Eective returns
Pakistan Algeria
Morocco
24 851
109 556
All Other 
Afghanistan
Albania
Ukraine Syria
Turkey
Iraq
Tunisia Bangladesh
Mali
Georgia
Serbia
Russia
24 764
2403
23 581
7 686
21 665
971
11 291
1 884
20 449
10 985
14 936
619
19 480
1 969
18 983
1 052
9 715
1 496
7 317
183
7 706
4 274
5 086
3 158
5 203
3 158
8 542
2 416
7 866
474 Please note that the number 
of effective returns may 
sometimes be larger than 
return decisions, as a return 
decision issued in a given 
month may be effectively 
enforced at a later date. 
Also, return decisions may 
be issued without prejudice 
to the person’s right to apply 
for asylum. Readmissions 
between Member States are 
not included (for example 
between France and Italy). 
Effective returns do not 
necessarily mean returns to 
the country of origin and, for 
example in the case of Syrians, 
they include returns of persons 
to third countries considered 
to be safe (for example from 
Hungary to Serbia).
Source: RDC data as of 
15 February 2021
24 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
5.5 Returns
The COVID-19 pandemic had a deceler-
ating effect on return activities in EU 
MS/SAC. An assessment of effective re-
turns conducted by Member States in 
2020 shows that the total number (around 
66 000)1 decreased by around 50% com-
pared with 2019. While January and Feb-
ruary 2020 figures were on par with the 
same months in 2019, in March 2020, 
only around 6 000 effective returns were 
reported. This is one third fewer than in 
March 2019. April 2020 was significantly 
affected by the pandemic – only 892 ef-
fective returns were reported, which rep-
resents less than 10% of the April 2019 
figure. From May the monthly number 
of effective returns slowly picked up and 
peaked at 6 400 in August, which was still 
only around 60% of what was reported in 
August 2019.
The trend of effective returns was not in 
line with the number of return decisions 
issued in 2020, which was even higher 
than in 2019 (+6%, at around 316 000). 
While numbers in January and February 
2020, before the outbreak of the pandemic 
in Europe, were somewhat higher than 
in the preceding year, the number of re-
turn decisions decreased in March, April 
1 At time of writing, several EU MS/SAC 
had not submitted data for the full 
year 2020. Annex Table 13 gives detailed 
information.
and May, during the first set of significant 
restrictive measures of European author-
ities to fight the pandemic. Again, in the 
second half of 2020, return decisions were 
comparable to those of 2019.
Between 2011 (when Frontex data collec-
tion on return began) and 2019, the yearly 
number of effective returns remained rel-
atively stable at around 150 000, only to a 
very limited extent influenced by the ac-
tual irregular migration situation. Hence 
the return situation in 2020 was unprec-
edented in terms of its abrupt decrease. 
Data reported by Member States in 2020 
show that neither the irregular migration 
pressure nor the number of asylum appli-
cations and decisions decreased to the ex-
tent that effective returns did.
Since 2013, the gap between effective 
returns and return decisions has slowly 
been growing. In 2013, the number of 
effective returns amounted to 71% of the 
return decisions reported by Member 
States. By 2019, this share had fallen to 
46%. In 2020, the pandemic accelerated 
this trend, as the number of conducted 
returns amounted to only 21% of the re-
turn decisions issued.
In 2020, the reduction in return ac-
tivities was mainly caused by limita-
tions placed on international travel and 
decreased activities of EU MS/SAC and 
third-country consular authorities. As 
long as the measures against COVID-19 
prevail, the number of effective returns 
will remain significantly lower than be-
fore the outbreak of the pandemic. 
The combination of an ongoing and 
stable issuance of return decisions and 
fewer actual returns is likely to lead to 
a significant backlog in returns once 
COVID-19-related travel restrictions are 
lifted. On the other hand, the poten-
tially slower distribution of vaccines to 
many countries of origin is likely to lead 
to ongoing limitations for return activi-
ties throughout 2021 and possibly 2022.
However, variations in the number of 
return decisions exist that are largely re-
liant on what data Member States exactly 
report, which mainly depends on the prac-
tices in place in each Member State when 
issuing return decisions. For example, in 
some EU countries, several different au-
thorities are in charge of issuing return 
decisions, but not all of them might be re-
porting this data to the Return Data Col-
lection (RDC). In addition, according to 
the national legislation in some Member 
States, an irregular migrant might also 
receive several return decisions that are 
reported, thereby accumulating a siza-
ble share of this indicator. It can there-
fore be asserted that, when taking into 
account the aforementioned caveats, no 
direct comparison or link between the in-
dicators of return decisions and effective 
returns should be established.
25 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
negative first-instance asylum decisions 
to Afghans and 12 500 to Pakistanis.3
In absolute numbers, the most sig-
nificant decline in effective returns con-
cerned countries of the Caucasus region. 
4 274 Georgians were returned in 2020, 
compared to around 7 300 in 2019. The 
number of Armenians and Azerbaija-
nis returned decreased by 53% and 54% 
to only 538 and 376 respectively.
In 2020, fewer return decisions were 
issued to Iraqi and Palestinian nationals 
(-27% and -39%), which was in line with 
fewer nationals from these two countries 
being detected for illegal border-crossing 
or illegal stay. Effective returns to these 
two countries decreased by around 46%.
Far fewer returns were also carried 
out in relation to Chinese and Mongolian 
nationals, down from around 2 400 and 
550 in 2019 , respectively to only around 
670 and 230 in 2020.
Africa
Approximately a third of all return deci-
sions in the EU were issued to nationals 
of African countries: Between 2019 and 
2020, the number of decisions remained 
roughly similar at just over 95 000. Those 
issued to nationals of Algeria and Tuni-
sia rose considerably, by 50% and 96% to 
18 900 and 8 500 respectively.
At the same time, between 2019 and 
2020, effective returns to Africa decreased 
by more than two thirds. The most sig-
nificant absolute decline was registered 
for North Africans. While in 2019, around 
20 000 persons from North Africa were 
returned, the number decreased to 
fewer than 6 600 in 2020. The number 
3 According to Eurostat. Only asylum 
decision figures for the first nine months 
of the year taken into consideration.
of returns of Algerians and Moroccans 
decreased by respectively 80% and 75%, 
to around 1 000 and 2 400. At the same 
time, the irregular migration pressure 
from these two countries and the en-
tire North African region grew signifi-
cantly, as border crossings in 2020 more 
than doubled.
The number of return decisions is-
sued to Western African migrants re-
mained roughly stable in 2020 at around 
28 000. In contrast, the number of effec-
tive returns, which was already low in 
2019 (around 5 200), further decreased 
in 2020 to 1 800. 
Between 2019 and 2020, return deci-
sions issued to citizens of Eastern Afri-
can countries decreased by 16% to around 
8 200. Similar to other regions, returns 
in relation to Eastern Africans (espe-
cially Eritreans and Ethiopians) also de-
creased, by 64%, down to fewer than 
600 in 2020.
Latin America and the Caribbean
The number of return decisions issued 
to nationals of Latin America and the 
Caribbean remained stable at around 
18 200 in 2020. 2019 saw a strong increase 
in asylum applications of Latin Ameri-
can nationals, which doubled to more 
than 100 000. Also the number of neg-
ative first-instance asylum decisions in-
creased, from around 22 900 in 2019 to 
64 500 in 2020. Return decisions issued 
to nationals of this region remained sta-
ble, at around 18 400.
That withstanding, the number of 
effective returns decreased by 40%, to 
fewer than 6 500 in 2020. While returns 
of nationals of South and Central Ameri-
can countries decreased by roughly half, 
returns of citizens of Caribbean island 
states declined to a larger extent, by 85%. 
2019 2020
Return 
Decisions
Effective 
Returns
Return 
Decisions
Effective 
Returns
Western Balkans 25 920 23 844 34 979 14 940
Eastern Europe 46 190 38 036 32 003 16 664
Western Africa 26 131 5 226 28 329 1 837
Northern Africa 46 153 19 884 58 496 6 541
Eastern Africa 9 903 1 638 8 262 583
Southern Asia 55 057 10 239 61 016 5 284
Middle East 40 899 8 471 40 154 4 460
Caucasus 8 745 9 326 9 560 5 188
Latin America and the Caribbean 18 585 10 776 18 240 6 454
Source: RDC data as of 15 February 2021
Regional overview of returns
European third countries
Return decisions issued to nationals of 
Western Balkan countries grew signif-
icantly, from around 26 000 in 2019 to 
almost 35 000 in 2020. The increase con-
cerned all Western Balkan nationalities, 
with a higher proportion of decisions is-
sued to Albanian nationals by Greece. 
In contrast, effective returns of West-
ern Balkan nationals decreased by one 
third, from around 23 800 in 2019 to al-
most 15 000 in 2020. While returns to Al-
bania halved, returns to other Western 
Balkan countries decreased by only 15%.
Returns to the Western Balkans are 
to be seen against the background of 
a decreasing irregular migration pres-
sure in 2020, both in terms of asylum 
applications and illegal stay. Likewise, 
the number of first-instance asylum de-
cisions (most of which were negative) 
decreased substantially in 2020: in the 
case of Albanian nationals by 50% com-
pared to 2019.2
In relation to Eastern European na-
tionals both return indicators decreased 
between 2019 and 2020: return decisions 
by 33% to 32 003, and effective returns by 
57% to 16 664. 
Asia and the Middle East
Overall, around 35% of return decisions 
in 2020 were issued to nationals of Asian 
and Middle Eastern countries, which 
represents a growth of 5% compared with 
2019. The number of related effective re-
turns halved.
Although the irregular migration 
pressure from Afghanistan and Paki-
stan was lower in 2020, the number of 
return decisions issued to these nation-
als was significant, with an increase of 
17% and 14% to 21 600 and 19 400 respec-
tively. At the same time, effective re-
turns of Afghans decreased by 41%, to 
only 971 in 2020. To Pakistan, only 1 969 
persons were returned, 34% fewer than 
in 2019. During the first nine months of 
2020 alone, Member States issued 10 800 
2 According to Eurostat. Only asylum 
decision figures for the first nine months 
of the year taken into consideration.
5.6  An Integrated Asylum-Migration Picture 
by EASO, Europol and Frontex¹
26 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
In 20201European citizens faced funda-
mental challenges to their way of life, 
including to the right of free movement 
within the Schengen Area. The COVID-19 
pandemic and the associated emergency 
measures implemented by the European 
Union and Schengen Associated Coun-
tries (EU/SACs) also had an impact on 
the functioning and daily work of na-
tional asylum and law enforcement 
authorities, including border control 
authorities. In particular, asylum ser-
vices were partially or fully suspended in 
some EU/SACs, and asylum authorities 
had to revert to other working arrange-
ments (e.g. home office, shift systems) 
and rely more on digital technologies. 
Border guard authorities faced a human 
resource shortage caused by personnel on 
sick leave or quarantined in the context 
of a more complex operational environ-
ment linked to the emergency measures. 
Investigators also faced changes in work-
ing arrangements and a human resource 
shortage. In addition, many law enforce-
ment investigative authorities have had 
to reallocate resources to new tasks, as a 
result of the shift in national priorities 
and the prioritisation of public safety.
COVID-19 and national emergency 
measures also had a considerable 
1 This chapter may use different 
formulations and abbreviations than 
found elsewhere in the report due to its 
collaborative drafting.
influence on opportunities for migra-
tion to Europe and internal movements 
across the EU/SACs. The number of ille-
gal border-crossings (IBCs) on the exter-
nal land and sea borders fell by 12%, to 
just over 125 000 detections. It is the low-
est recorded number of IBCs since 2013. 
The spread of COVID-19 and related 
emergency measures had an impact on 
the activities of criminal networks in-
volved in migrant smuggling. After an 
initial slow-down in migrant smuggling 
activities, criminal networks quickly 
adapted their modi operandi and resumed 
their activities. This was particularly 
seen among criminal networks offer-
ing services for secondary movements 
to irregular migrants already present in 
the EU/SAC or in neighbouring regions.2
Meanwhile, the number of appli-
cations for international protection 
lodged in 2020 was 31% smaller com-
pared to a year ago. In the last months 
of 2019 (except December) and in Jan-
uary and February 2020, the number 
of asylum applications rose; however, 
in the second half of March the situa-
tion changed completely. In April and 
May, the months most affected by the 
pandemic, applications were at about 
2 Europol 2020, How COVID-19-related 
crime infected Europe during 2020, 
accessible at https://www.europol.
europa.eu/publications-documents/how-
covid-19-related-crime-infected-europe-
during-2020 
one sixth of what they had been at the 
beginning of the year. In the summer, 
the numbers began to rise but they re-
mained at about two-thirds of the early 
2020 values for the rest of the year. The 
main countries of origin of asylum ap-
plicants in 2020 were Syria, Afghani-
stan, Venezuela and Colombia, in line 
with the previous year but accounting 
for a higher proportion of the total (37%). 
Overall, some 461 300 applications for 
international protection were lodged by 
third-country nationals in the EU/SACs. 
Hence, there were nearly four asylum 
applications for each detected illegal bor-
der-crossing. Such a discrepancy is not 
new, although the gap between the two 
indicators has narrowed slightly since 
2019. There are multiple reasons for the 
discrepancy. An important one is that 
some third-country nationals apply for 
asylum more than once in the same 
EU/SAC after receiving a final decision 
on a previous application. Such repeated 
applications represented 11% of the total 
in 2020, a marginally higher proportion 
than in 2019. Among citizenship groups 
with at least 1 000 applications, Serbi-
ans, Macedonians, Russians, Azerbaija-
nis, Kosovars, and Armenians had the 
highest proportions of repeated appli-
cants: close to or more than a third for 
each. While high proportions of repeat 
applications are typical for these nation-
alities, all of them had higher shares 
than in 2019.
27 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
0
10 000
20 000
30 000
40 000
50 000
60 000
70 000
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
Detections of illegal border-crossing
Repeated applications of all nationalities and first-time applications of visa-exempt nationalities
Other first-time asylum applications
First instance decisions
The statistics presented in this analysis are based on data collected by the European Border and Coast Guard Agency (Frontex) and the European Asylum Office (EASO) under different indicators; direct comparisons between 
these data are thus not possible. EASO data are provisional and cover EU Member States plus Norway and Switzerland. Europol’s analysis is based on EU Member States and operational partners’ contributions 2019–2020.
 The gap between applications for international protection and detections of 
illegal border-crossings persisted in 2020 but has recently become narrower, 
especially if repeated applications and applications lodged by nationals of visa-
exempt countries are discounted. For most of 2020, more decisions were issued 
at first instance than asylum applications were lodged.
28 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
There was also an increase in the pro-
portion of Nigerians applying repeatedly 
in the same country – to 27% in 2020. 
Many asylum seekers do not arrive 
in Europe illegally, but cross the exter-
nal border in a regular fashion. Some 
of them arrive with a visa, and nation-
als of 62 states and territories worldwide 
are exempt from the visa requirement. 
Many of the latter represent important 
places of origin for asylum applicants. 
In 2020, a quarter of all applicants were 
from visa-exempt countries, despite a 
decrease in the absolute number from 
2019 by more than a third. Given the 
implementation of travel restrictions on 
most third countries since March 2020, 
it is likely that most of the applications 
made since were of third-country na-
tionals who had arrived at the EU/SACs 
earlier but had not yet lodged their ap-
plications. Venezuelans and Colombi-
ans remained the most numerous in the 
visa-free group, but considerable num-
bers of applications also continued to be 
lodged by Georgians, Peruvians, Ukrain-
ians and Hondurans, among others. Al-
though most visa-exempt citizens enter 
legally, some overstay their permission 
to stay and then become irregular. EU/
SACs reported the detection of around 
48 500 illegally staying third-country 
nationals who had entered the EU/SACs 
legally, 38% fewer than in 2019. Most mi-
grants in this group were nationals of 
Ukraine, Albania, Georgia and Serbia. 
In addition, sometimes people who 
arrive in the EU illegally attempt to evade 
registration on arrival, in particular if 
their planned destination is another 
country. In other words, third-country 
nationals sometimes crossed the exter-
nal land and sea borders undetected 
and then continued their journey in-
side the EU/SACs area. This situation 
is well illustrated by cases of migrant 
smuggling reported to Europol. In one 
case an organised crime group facili-
tated irregular migrants into Poland and 
then to Western Europe by concealing 
them in compartments in vans or among 
commodities in lorries.3 The deployment 
of the European Border and Coast Guard 
standing corps will advance border man-
agement and contribute to reducing the 
number of such undetected IBCs. 
Some irregular migrants also choose 
to enter the EU/SAC area by air. In or-
der to enhance their chances of reaching 
their preferred destinations, they often 
use fraudulent documents (e.g. coun-
terfeit visas, passports, and residence 
permits, authentic but fraudulently ob-
tained visas, authentic documents used 
as impostors). Criminal networks of-
fer facilitation by air, which is usually 
linked to high fees and supported by the 
provision of fraudulent documents. Or-
ganised crime is often involved in the 
production of false documents and in il-
legally obtaining and distributing genu-
ine documents. Fraudulent documents 
are increasingly traded online. Criminals 
offer a wide range of genuine or false 
documents on online marketplaces and 
use such platforms to receive orders di-
rectly from clients. Due to COVID-19 and 
related travel restrictions, compared to 
2019 the number of individuals detected 
at airports with fraudulent documents 
on entry to the EU/SACs fell by 57% to 
around 1 500 cases in 2020. At the same 
time, however, EU/SACs reported an in-
coming passenger flow at their airports 
that decreased by up to 75%. The com-
parison shows that the relative risk of 
document fraud has not diminished dur-
ing the pandemic, especially in relation 
to nationalities that frequently apply 
for asylum: the highest-ranking among 
document fraudsters detected on entry 
at EU/SACs airports were third-country 
nationals who claimed to be from Tur-
key, Iran, Ukraine, Syria and Georgia.
Not all applicants remain in an asy-
lum procedure until it is completed. 
Sometimes asylum applications are 
3 https://www.europol.europa.eu/
newsroom/news/polish-authorities-
arrest-8-in-latest-migrant-smuggling-
sting
withdrawn explicitly or implicitly. The 
latter usually happens when a migrant 
absconds, which might be because the 
migrant plans to reapply in a different 
EU/SAC at a later stage. Occasionally, 
migrant smugglers encourage irregu-
lar migrants to apply for international 
protection once in a transit country, in 
order to exploit the time needed for the 
authorities to examine the asylum ap-
plication. During this time, facilitators 
make the necessary arrangements for the 
irregular migrants’ further facilitation 
across the EU/SAC territory towards their 
country of destination. In 2020, one ap-
plication was implicitly withdrawn for 
every 13 lodged. This phenomenon was 
particularly relevant for Moroccans, for 
whom the ratio of lodged to implicitly 
withdrawn applications was approxi-
mately three to one. Among third-coun-
try nationals applying for asylum in high 
numbers in 2020, the ratio was also rel-
atively high for citizens of Egypt, India, 
Turkey and Algeria. 
When a migrant lodges an asylum ap-
plication, the claim is examined by na-
tional asylum authorities. The length of 
this process varies across EU/SACs and 
countries of origin. The examination 
results in a decision at first instance, 
which may be challenged in appeal or 
review. In 2020, similar to applications, 
decisions at first instance fell compared 
to 2019, but only marginally. Moreover, 
the 521 000 decisions issued were more 
numerous than the applications lodged, 
which is a new development (compared 
to both 2018 and 2019). This implies that 
in the context of reduced activities dur-
ing COVID-19 emergency measures, EU/
SACs focused on clearing the backlog of 
asylum applications. 
In 2020, just under a third of decisions 
at first instance granted refugee status 
or subsidiary protection, in line with 
the previous year. Unsuccessful appli-
cants may submit an appeal. Once a neg-
ative decision becomes final, the next 
step in the process is a return decision, 
following which failed asylum seekers 
29 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
are to return to their country of origin. 
While between 2019 and 2020 the num-
ber of return decisions increased by 6% 
to 320 000, the number of effective re-
turns of third-country nationals halved, 
amounting to only 67 000 in 2020. Ac-
cordingly, the gap between the two in-
dicators continued to widen. 
Not all third-country nationals who 
arrive in the EU/SACs irregularly intend 
to apply for international protection or 
travel for the purposes of seeking asy-
lum. Some decide to remain illegally 
(e.g. because they may not have legal 
grounds for protection). In spite of the 
significant decrease in irregular migra-
tion pressure at the EU’s external bor-
ders, EU/SACs reported around 370 000 
detections of illegal stay in 2020, which 
represents a decrease of only 8% com-
pared to 2019.
On the other hand, others are brought 
to EU/SACs and moved across the free 
movement area for purposes other than 
irregular migration. Victims of traffick-
ing in human beings originating outside 
the EU/SACs are often trafficked using 
the same infrastructure and routes used 
by migrant smugglers. In parallel with 
some smuggling cases, especially in the 
case of lengthy journeys and expensive 
travel arrangements, irregular migrants 
agree to become indebted to their facili-
tators and repay their debt upon arrival, 
which often leads to exploitative and 
inhumane working practices and pro-
longed periods of debt bondage. 
The pandemic and national efforts to 
contain it led to a different situational 
picture in 2020, and the effect continues 
in 2021. In this context EASO, Europol 
and Frontex remain committed to sup-
porting their stakeholders in national 
authorities and working jointly for a bet-
ter understanding of an integrated asy-
lum-migration picture in the EU/SACs.

© Frontex, 2018
6.  Other Border Management 
Challenges
32 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
6.1 Terrorism
A global and enduring threat
From the various typologies of terror-
ism, Islamist extremism remains the 
foremost terror threat to the EU. Many 
of the (re)estimated 50 000 foreign ter-
rorist fighters (FTFs) that were active in 
conflict zones in Syria and Iraq are still 
unaccounted for. In fact, over the past 
number of years, there has been a re-
surgence of Da’esh related incidents in 
both Syria and Iraq. 
“Da’esh remains resilient and al-
Qaeda has ingrained itself in local 
communities and conflicts. Both organ-
izations and their global affiliates and 
supporters continue to generate violence 
around the world, whether through in-
surgency tactics, the direction and fa-
cilitation of terrorism or providing the 
inspiration for attacks. Da’esh operations 
have increased in the core conflict zone 
of Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. 
Behind this trend lies a more complex 
picture, in which Da’esh maintains the 
ambition to control territory and popu-
lations but, for now, represents an en-
trenched rural insurgency without the 
reach to threaten urban areas on a sus-
tained basis.
The impact of the coronavirus disease 
(COVID-19) pandemic on terrorism has 
varied between conflict zones and non-
conflict zones and between short- and 
longer-term threats. Groups are using 
the outbreak to advance propaganda and 
fundraising and, in some regions, are 
seeking to take advantage of perceptions 
that the attention of security forces is di-
verted elsewhere. At the same time, the 
pandemic has made cross-border travel 
more difficult and targets more elusive, 
and the operational tempo of attacks 
has slowed discernibly in some regions. 
The international community contin-
ues to struggle with whether and how to 
return and reintegrate fighters from the 
conflict zone and their family members 
into their countries of origin and/or na-
tionality. The global pandemic has fur-
ther complicated efforts to provide the 
relevant consular and screening services 
and presents additional challenges to 
a range of counter-terrorism efforts.”1 
No other predominant conflict zone 
has emerged after Da’esh’s loss of 
1 UN reports of the Analytical Support and 
Sanctions Monitoring Team submitted 
pursuant to resolution 2368 (2017).
territory in Syria and Iraq. Many fight-
ers have melted into the local popula-
tion and have stayed there, while others 
are still lying low in certain neighbour-
ing countries.
Depending on the developments in 
various conflict zones around the world, 
some may seek to move elsewhere or 
else be directed to do so. Irrespective of 
whether such travelling is sanctioned 
by the relevant groups’ structures, the 
use of regular or irregular movements – 
or both – is still assessed to depend on a 
variety of chances and constraints.
© srodas – stock.adobe.com
33 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
The border dimension
Systematic database checks
Checks at the external borders remain 
one of the main safeguards of the Schen-
gen area and contribute to the internal 
security of the EU. Checks against data-
bases must cover regular and irregular 
movements, at all types of border and 
in all directions. Borders provide chal-
lenges but also opportunities in counter-
ing terrorism as they offer a geographical 
spread where EU MS/SAC can take ex-
ecutive actions and pursue judicial or 
prosecutorial actions. Therefore EU MS/
SAC, with the support of JHA Agencies, 
can make the best use of the legislative 
framework that aims to deter, disrupt 
and detect terrorist-related movements 
and detain those involved in terrorist-
related activities.
Maximising database consultations
Regulation (EU) 2019/1896 reiterates the 
Agency’s supporting role to EU MS/SAC 
counter-terrorism efforts. Frontex activ-
ities can support EU MS/SAC in identi-
fying travelling terrorists or ‘subjects of 
interest’ through detailed checks.
Article 82(10) of the EBCG Regulation, 
states that “the host Member State shall 
authorise members of the teams to con-
sult Union databases, the consultation 
of which is necessary for fulfilling op-
erational aims specified in the opera-
tional plan on border checks […] The host 
Member State may also authorise mem-
bers of the teams to consult its national 
databases where necessary for the same 
purpose.” Frontex can with the imple-
mentation of Article 82(10) have access 
to the Schengen Information System 
and thereby support EU MS/SAC in the 
efforts to identify terrorists at the ex-
ternal border.
The Schengen Borders Code and the 
Schengen Information System changes 
plus the introduction of the Entry/Exit 
System, the Electronic Travel Informa-
tion and Authorisation System, the in-
teroperability between EU information 
systems and the European Search Portal 
are all aimed at improving and maxim-
ising database consultations within the 
border dimension.
CEPOL
EU CTC
EUROPOL
INTCEN
INTERPOL
Asylum
Informing and reporting
in various EU languages
Border 
guards
Customs
Law 
Enforcement
Specialised 
services
Visa / Consular 
authorities
CCWP
COSI
COTER
TWP
Engaging, supporti
ng
Inform
ing, in fluencing EU policy    
O
utreaching, spreading know
ledge 
Ad
ap
tin
g to
 the th
reat, facilitating access    
Supporting 
within the border 
dimension and beyond
counter-terrorism 
34 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
6.2 Cross-Border Crime: Firearms Smuggling
Firearms trafficking is a global threat 
that impacts society in multiple ways. 
It is a major security concern, and is 
thus central to law enforcement efforts 
and activities. Firearms are instrumen-
tal in violence, are crime enablers and 
fuel armed conflicts and terrorism. The 
most common form of weapons traffick-
ing involves small arms and light weap-
ons, but the trade varies significantly 
from region to region, due to the vary-
ing legal requirements and firearms leg-
islation in different countries.
Illegal firearms enable other forms of 
crime by means of coercion and intim-
idation. Recent terrorist attacks in the 
EU, as well as accompanying seizures 
of firearms during various cross-border 
and inland operations, demonstrate the 
multidimensional and multi-criminal 
nature of this phenomenon.
In Europe, the predominant type of 
firearms smuggling is the so-called ‘ant 
trade’ (Cross-border smuggling of rela-
tively small numbers of firearms and am-
munition mostly using passenger cars), 
carried out by both organised crime 
groups and individuals, and often orig-
inating from post-conflict countries. 
Other trends have been increasingly 
observed in recent years, including the 
smuggling of easy-to-convert blank fir-
ing weapons or the online purchase of 
gun parts and components, delivered by 
postal services. 
In 2020, firearms smuggling was, like 
other fields of cross-border crime, af-
fected by limited cross-border flows and 
changes in the intensity of checks. The 
composition of the seizures followed the 
pattern of detections in previous years. 
Most detections took place on entry, at 
land borders, in cars or hidden in trav-
ellers’ luggage. The majority of am-
munition and weapons seizures hence 
were not related to large-scale traffick-
ing. Smugglers claimed that their vio-
lations were based on the negligence or 
inattention of legal owners who inad-
vertently had left parts of weapons in 
the vehicle, and whose weapons are des-
ignated for personal use or protection. 
With the limitation of non-essential 
movements and stricter controls, such 
incidents declined in 2020 – a side effect 
of the pandemic. Besides firearms1 and 
ammunition, seizures of cold arms, pro-
hibited pepper sprays, electric shockers 
and other weapons were also frequently 
reported. Explosives were seldom de-
tected in 2020.
While significant amounts of fire-
arms are usually trafficked by sea, only 
minor detections were reported in 2020. 
Moreover, seizures on international 
flights were limited, since the risk of 
1 In the context of detections at external 
borders, the term ‘firearms’ does 
not follow the general definition. As 
the primary purpose of border guard 
measures is to detect and prevent the 
movement of firearms and related cross-
border crimes, the focus is more on the 
physical appearance at the moment 
border-control measures are taken 
than on later forensic examination and 
intelligence. Firearms in this context 
also include weapons like gas pistols or 
decoration weapons.
© Frontex, 2020
35 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
detection of such weapons at airports is 
higher due to the use of metal detectors, 
x-rays and explosives trace-detection (for 
both passengers and their luggage).
The land borders with the Western 
Balkans, Ukraine, Moldova and Turkey 
remained the border sections most at 
risk from firearms smuggling. While 
increased seizures by national author-
ities in neighbouring post-crisis areas 
might indicate that the EU’s external 
borders are facing a greater threat, the 
same volume of smuggling could not be 
confirmed through detections at these 
borders.
The situation on the EU’s external 
borders is in line with the general global 
development. Several trends identified 
globally will pose challenges for border 
authorities. For example, the smuggling 
of firearms broken down into compo-
nents is much harder to detect, and such 
smuggled special components and ac-
cessories can significantly alter the le-
thality and use of a firearm. Smuggled 
components can also complete a set of 
3D-printed parts. Shipping by fast par-
cels further adds to the problem. 
The WCO report for 2019 highlights 
that 82% of all detections made by cus-
toms officers were based on risk profil-
ing, while routine controls accounted for 
around 15%, but generally led to larger 
volumes of seizures. Such conclusions 
once again underline the significance 
of cooperation with all EU and interna-
tional partners, as well as with Border 
Guard and Customs authorities, bridge 
existing information and intelligence 
gaps, and ensure an appropriate, com-
prehensive and tailored response to 
transportation at the borders through 
detailed checks of travellers based on 
profiling. 
Besides the detection of ‘ant smuggling’, some seizures 
indicate a larger-scale weapon trafficking. 
In one case at the external borders with the WB, a weapon 
found in a Czech-registered car led to a thorough search of 
the vehicle. Six ‘AK-47’ automatic rifles, 12 magazines and 
231 pieces of 7.62 mm ammunition were found in the trunk. 
Source: Aggregated EU MS/SAC-provided data
Firearms smuggling 
undefined
SEA
LAND Eastern European land borders
Land borders with the Western Balkan countries
Land borders in the Eastern Mediterranean region
4%
9%
3%
49%
35%
16%CASES
7%
39%
18%
17%
19%
64%
VOLUME
36 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
6.3 Cross-Border Crime: Drug Trafficking 
Drug trafficking in Europe has main-
tained or even surpassed the levels of pre-
vious years. The COVID-19 pandemic has 
caused short-term downturns in smug-
gling activities, but criminal networks 
have managed to adapt, and pre-pan-
demic levels have returned. Despite the 
pandemic, smuggling of illicit drugs 
continues to be a serious threat at the 
EU’s external borders. 
In 2020 there were 609 detections of 
drug smuggling and 145 tonnes of vari-
ous illicit drugs seized during Frontex-
coordinated joint operations. Although 
this was a slight decrease of reported in-
cidents (-7%) compared to 2019, it was an 
increase in quantity seized (11%). 
The majority of detections (72%) and 
quantities (98%) were reported at sea bor-
ders or adjacent land areas. While detec-
tions at land BCPs remained relatively 
high (17%), the quantity of drugs seized 
was smaller (1%), confirming that crim-
inal networks continued to rely mostly 
on maritime routes for high-volume 
drug smuggling. The continuous high 
number of detections at air borders (11%) 
shows the growing importance of air 
routes, which smugglers use even in 
times of passenger flow restrictions.
Drug seizures were mostly reported in 
the Western Mediterranean region (79%). 
The Central and Eastern Mediterranean 
sea borders also saw several high-volume 
seizures. In contrast, the land borders 
in the Balkans reported single seizures 
of various drugs and volumes, usually 
concealed in passenger cars or trucks 
and trailers. The Eastern land borders re-
ported a relatively high number of drug 
detections, but most of them referred to 
illicit substances for personal use found 
in personal belongings. 
Similar to previous years, detections 
of hashish were most common, with 68% 
of all incidents and 88% of the volume of 
drugs seized in 2020. Herbal cannabis 
represented 14% of seizures but only 1% of 
the total quantity. Cocaine seizures have 
also been increasingly reported during 
the last couple of years, representing 9% 
of seizures and 10% of volume in 2020. 
Reporting of heroin and synthetic drug 
seizures remained at a very low level.
Cannabis is the most popular drug 
worldwide and the most cultivated. 
Generally, herbal cannabis and hash-
ish are trafficked in bulk and traffickers 
put less effort into concealment, often 
abandoning the drugs at sea or while 
crossing land borders if there is a risk of 
capture. Large-scale cultivation and low 
production costs have ensured high ac-
cessibility. Migrant smuggling and other 
criminal activities have often been com-
bined with drug smuggling activities or 
have been committed by the same crim-
inal networks.
Reporting of cannabis smuggling has 
stayed at high levels in recent years due 
to the good level of cooperation between 
Frontex and national law enforcement 
authorities in the most affected regions. 
Around 208 tonnes of hashish and 2.5 
tonnes of herbal cannabis were seized 
in 2020, mostly by the Spanish, Italian 
and Greek authorities. 
Cannabis resin is mainly trafficked 
across the Strait of Gibraltar. Outdoor can-
nabis cultivation is widely spread world-
wide in areas with favourable conditions. 
Southeast Europe and the Western Bal-
kans in particular have been associated 
with large-scale outdoor cultivation, while 
Central and Western European countries 
have developed indoor production. 
In recent years law enforcement au-
thorities have witnessed an exponential 
growth in cocaine trafficking from Latin 
America. The demand for cocaine in Eu-
rope has remained strong which, together 
with national reports of large detections 
at some of the main EU entry points, has 
given grounds for 2020 estimates to sur-
pass the record high quantities of 2019. 
E.g. in 2020, the Dutch and Belgian au-
thorities recorded a continuation of the 
record seizures of cocaine on the trans-
atlantic routes from mainly Brazil, Ec-
uador and Colombia. Along with these 
direct routes, however, cocaine was also 
rerouted either through West and North 
Africa or the Adriatic and the Western Bal-
kans. The Black Sea region was also used 
to diversify smuggling channels. 
The growth in high-volume cocaine 
trafficking in containers on various mar-
itime routes stands out as a major trend. 
The main entry points were ports in West-
ern and Northern Europe, although sei-
zures in the Mediterranean were on the 
rise. Criminals often attempt to conceal 
the routes and the origins of the cargo, 
preferably presenting it as arriving via 
unsuspected routes. Criminals also deal 
with the logistics of unloading and trans-
porting drugs within Europe, often using 
the cover of legal business structures and 
infiltrating relevant control authorities, 
as well as relying on encrypted commu-
nication apps. 
So
ur
ce
: F
ro
nt
ex
 jo
in
t o
pe
ra
tio
ns
 d
at
a a
nd
 EU
RO
SU
R 
da
ta
 as
 o
f 1
5 
Fe
br
ua
ry
 2
02
1
Drug Seizures in 2020
at the external border
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
DRUG TYPE
hashish marijuana cocaine heroin other drugs
AREA TYPE
AIR
SEA
LANDDrug Seizures in 2020
at the external border
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
DRUG TYPE
hashish marijuana cocaine heroin other drugs
AREA TYPE
AIR
SEA
LAND
37 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
In 2020 Frontex received reports of the 
seizure of 24 tonnes of cocaine, which is 
an 87% rise on the previous year, mostly 
by Spain and Portugal in the Western 
Mediterranean and North Atlantic. Sin-
gle cocaine seizures were reported at 
Greek and Italian ports as well. Addi-
tionally, there was an increasing num-
ber of detections of drugs by the French 
authorities in the English Channel en 
route to the UK.
Law enforcement authorities wit-
nessed intensive smuggling of smaller 
quantities of cocaine at land borders and 
airports. Generally, quarantine rules and 
restrictions on travel, especially for non-
EU arrivals, have affected trafficking 
by drug couriers. On the other hand, 
air cargo is a crucial enabler for online 
trade and new digital business models. 
COVID-19 has led to an overall 20% rise in 
cargo flights worldwide, and estimates 
show that around 80% of online trade is 
transported by air1, including various il-
licit goods. Cocaine and other drugs at 
EU airports have usually been detected 
in small postal packages but also in big-
ger cargo shipments. 
Heroin is the most frequently used 
opioid and the main contributor to drug-
related harm. The stable demand for her-
oin is determined by the high number 
of opioid users in the EU.2 
In 2020 there was a decrease in sei-
zures of heroin via the traditional land 
routes. 177  kg were seized in opera-
tional activities supported by Frontex. 
The detections were made at various lo-
cations, including land BCPs, seaports 
and airports.
1 IATA: The e-Commerce Impact on Air 
Cargo Operations, Nov 2020
2 EMCDDA European Drug Report 2020
Large quantities of heroin have usu-
ally been detected before being imported 
to the EU. However, in the last couple 
of years occasional large hauls in some 
EU Member States and third countries 
have pointed to the increasing activity 
of criminal groups within the EU and 
the diversification of trafficking chan-
nels, following not only the most used 
Balkan route, but also alternatives in the 
Western Balkans and Eastern Europe. 
Maritime routes have also gained pop-
ularity, with big seizures in the Adriatic 
and Aegean and at some EU seaports on 
the west and south coasts of Europe. Ac-
tivity on routes towards Africa, as well 
as domestic heroin problems in some 
African countries, suggest an increas-
ing risk of heroin trafficking onward to 
Europe via the Arabian Sea, the Red Sea 
and the Mediterranean. This could lead 
to intensified smuggling of heroin at the 
Turkish, Greek and Italian maritime bor-
ders. The Black Sea region could also be 
considered as a transit zone for the im-
port of heroin to EU Member States as 
well as to third countries on the East-
ern land borders.
The trade in synthetic drugs and 
precursors nowadays is much more di-
verse, and global distribution depends 
on changes in demand. Industrial pro-
duction of chemical substances ensures 
considerable accessibility of precursors 
for illegal drug laboratories. Dangerous 
and controlled substances are often traf-
ficked disguised with counterfeit pack-
aging and supporting documents. The 
misuse of legal drugs has also been a 
growing issue, and the substances pro-
duced by the chemical and pharmaceu-
tical industries in Europe could also be 
a factor in drug-related harm. 
The environmental impact of syn-
thetic drug production has been a 
growing problem, which has resulted 
in illegal waste dumping and traffick-
ing of dangerous substances through 
the EU’s internal and external borders. 
In 2020 the reduced capacity of Chi-
na’s economy, reduced demand from EU 
industry and transport issues caused by 
the pandemic led to the limited availabil-
ity of some chemical substances which 
could be diverted to the manufacture of 
synthetic drugs. Scheduling of some of 
these substances in the export countries, 
e.g. China and India, has also contrib-
uted to the downward trend. 
In the last couple of years there has 
been a rise of Captagon seizures at south-
ern EU seaports arriving from the Mid-
dle East. A similar modus operandi has been 
observed for transporting drugs from the 
port of Latakia, Syria towards ports in 
the Central Mediterranean and Aegean, 
as well as the Black Sea region.3 Vari-
ous narcotic substances produced in the 
EU, Asia and Africa, e.g. ketamine and 
methamphetamine, have also been de-
tected at EU airports en route to North 
America or at the English Channel en 
route to the UK. 
Airmail has been used mostly for re-
distributing synthetic drugs to end cus-
tomers and local drug dealers following 
online orders on the internet and the 
darknet. As a consequence of social lim-
itations, street dealers have been partly 
replaced in 2020 by couriers delivering 
drugs directly to customers’ homes. 
The demand for illicit drugs in the EU 
will continue to be high, so criminals will 
continue to make investments in smug-
gling networks. Cultivation and produc-
tion will also continue close to places of 
consumption. The accessibility of drugs 
and precursors, as well as the capacities 
of criminal organisations and economic 
factors, will determine the flows of illicit 
drugs through the EU’s external borders. 
3 Greece, Report CBC – Captagon Pills, Jul 
2019; Frontex, Media Overview of Drug 
Trafficking in Europe in 2020, Feb 2021
A Frontex canine team from 
Portugal helped the Spanish 
authorities to confiscate a record 
4.6 tonnes of hashish with a street 
value of EUR 26 million at the port 
of Algeciras.
So
ur
ce
: S
pa
ni
sh
 M
in
ist
ry
 o
f t
he
 In
te
rio
r/F
ro
nt
ex
, A
ug
us
t 2
02
0
38 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
6.4  Cross-Border Crime: Cigarette Smuggling
Trade in counterfeit goods is estimated 
to stand at 3.3% of global commerce, 
and continues to rise. This type of ex-
cise fraud presents a risk to the EU and 
is therefore addressed at the external 
borders by border, coast guard and cus-
toms authorities. Among the most lucra-
tive businesses for individual criminals 
and criminal groups is the smuggling of 
tobacco products, which is considered a 
significant source of capital for organ-
ised crime, including terrorism. A 2019 
report by the World Bank estimates that 
the global illicit tobacco trade market 
generates between 40 and 50 billion US 
dollars annually. Besides the monetary 
proceeds and the consequent losses in 
tax revenue, the true dimension of this 
crime field requires border authorities to 
monitor and take measures to prevent 
and combat such activities.
According to a study (commissioned 
by the tobacco industry), the European 
market for illicit cigarettes reached a 
historical low in 2019, when EU con-
sumers purchased 38.9 billion illicit cig-
arettes. Despite the overall decline of 
illicit cigarette consumption, which con-
tinued for the seventh consecutive year, 
the consumption of counterfeit ciga-
rettes continued to grow. Illicit flows 
from markets outside the EU, continued 
to fall in 2019. However, illicit products 
reportedly originating in the EU – and 
destined for another EU country – in-
creased in 2019.
In 2020, a total of twenty interna-
tional operations involving the Euro-
pean Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) led to the 
seizure of nearly 370 million illegal cig-
arettes destined for the EU market. The 
majority were smuggled from countries 
outside the EU. More than two fifths of 
the cigarettes seized in this context orig-
inated in the Far East and another two 
fifth from eastern, south-eastern neigh-
boring countries and the Western Bal-
kans region. 
The illicit trade in tobacco is to a 
large extent enabled by price differen-
tials between EU Member States and/or 
neighbouring countries. Operational in-
formation exchanged via different chan-
nels indicates that serious and organised 
cigarette smuggling can be detected at 
all border types. Not only did individ-
ual consumers and small-scale smug-
glers from economically weak border 
regions try to take advantage of existing 
price differences, but criminal networks 
also tried to illicitly import cigarettes in 
large quantities, often to finance other 
illicit businesses.
Similar to other criminal activities, 
the pandemic and associated restrictions 
have strongly affected the smuggling of 
illicit cigarettes. During the first lock-
down, supply chains were cut, and es-
tablished modi operandi were interrupted 
for a longer period of time due to limi-
tations on passenger flows at the exter-
nal borders. Legal and illegal imports for 
Development Cigarette Smuggling
in relation to the passenger flow (PAX) 2020 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC
M
illi
on
s
PAX by sea
PAX land borders
PAX airports
incidents at sea
incidents land borders
Source: FRAN and Frontex joint operations data as of 15 February 2021
39 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
In 2020, Frontex coordinated three and co-led two Joint Action Days – 
international operations that bring together national law enforcement 
authorities, international organisations and EU agencies, including 
Europol and Eurojust, to take on serious and organised crime. These 
operations were coordinated under the umbrella of the European 
Multidisciplinary Platform against Criminal Threats (EMPACT).
one’s own consumption from neighbour-
ing countries were therefore hampered 
or no longer possible (due to limitations 
on non-essential travel). The risk of being 
detected while ‘ant smuggling’ (multi-
ple border crossings with small volumes 
of excise or illicit goods) rose as a result 
of more intense checks and significantly 
lower legal flows to blend in with. At the 
same time, both the lockdowns and de-
creases in consumers’ disposable income 
fuel the demand for cheap tobacco prod-
ucts. The lockdowns and border closures 
disrupted the tobacco black market and 
limited the opportunities to ship illicit 
tobacco products from production sites 
outside the EU. Criminal groups have 
thus adapted their modi operandi to the 
new realities at the borders, leading to an 
increase in illegal production sites in the 
EU, closer to major target markets. The 
smuggling of small quantities became 
less relevant in 2020. One of the ways 
to overcome or compensate for tighter 
restrictions was to blend illicit tobacco 
products into the legal transport of cargo. 
All means of transport were affected, 
from cargo trains, lorries and vans to 
shipments at sea. Similar to previous 
years, ‘covering shipments’ or specially 
built compartments to conceal goods in 
vehicles or in trains were designed for 
the purpose of smuggling cigarettes. 
Increased parcel shipments by air were 
also reported. With limited opportuni-
ties at BCPs, green borders and rivers 
were even more targeted in 2020. Exist-
ing cross-border infrastructures (tracks, 
sewage pipes…) were also (mis)-used, 
and in some regions technologies such as 
drones and motorised gliders were used 
to smuggle or drop packages. 
Source: Aggregated EU MS/SAC-provided data
Cigarette smuggling 
AIRSEALAND
Eastern European land borders
Land borders with the Western Balkan countries
Land borders in the Eastern Mediterranean region
50% 18% 20%
8%
88%
4%
CASES
54%
2%
1%
3%
57%
40%
VOLUME
40 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
Seizures in JADs are not purely based on border control measures: they include inland seizures and hence may dier from volumes 
mentioned in the analysis, which focuses exclusively on the external border.
Cigarette find during  
Joint Action Day Arktos 2  
© Frontex 2020
41 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
Seizures in JADs are not purely based on border control measures: they include inland seizures and hence may dier from volumes 
mentioned in the analysis, which focuses exclusively on the external border.
42 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
Over the past year, the COVID-19 pan-
demic has had a knock-on effect on 
motor vehicle crime in the EU. Long-
persisting border restrictions both at the 
EU’s external and internal Borders have 
limited the mobility of organised crime 
groups (OCGs) and increased the risk of 
detection. Some stockpiling of vehicles 
and parts has occurred, thereby putting 
economic pressure on criminal markets 
and forcing criminal groups to adapt 
their modi operandi.
In 2020, only 139 incidents related 
to 152 stolen vehicles were reported in 
the framework of Frontex-coordinated 
joint operations, which represents a 61% 
decrease compared with the preceding 
year.1 Improved law-enforcement results 
towards the end of 2020 indicated that 
the authorities managed to adapt quickly 
to the new conditions.
The majority of the targeted stolen 
vehicles were passenger cars of common 
makes and models (76%), with crimi-
nals aiming to turn over a quick profit 
from selling the vehicles on the second-
hand market, both physically in shops 
and scrap yards and on the internet. 
More new and expensive cars (includ-
ing SUV, electric and hybrid) (6%) were 
targeted by well-organised and sophis-
ticated criminal groups. Detections of 
trucks, trailers and minivans were also 
recorded representing roughly 5–6% of 
the total, while some specific vehicles 
and equipment constituted around 1% 
(e.g. industrial equipment, caravans 
and campers, boats and boat engines, 
etc.). The new environment has stimu-
lated crime-as-a-service activity in which 
criminals are engaged based on specific 
demands. In this regard, although the 
volume of stolen vehicles might have de-
creased, the financial loss for individu-
als and related businesses remains high 
and may even have increased.
1 Statistics from Frontex-coordinated joint 
operations (JORA)
Detections of Stolen Vehicles 2020
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC
FX Joint Operations (JORA) EU MS/SAC Border Surveillance (EUROSUR)
369 384 152507 456 266558 475 352
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
2018 2019 2020
Number of Seized Stolen Vehicles
FX Joint Operations
(JORA)
EU MS/SAC Border Surveillance
(EUROSUR)
EMPACT Activities
The main reasons for detection were 
search hits in SIS and Interpol data-
bases, alterations of Vehicle Identifi-
cation Number (VIN) (16%), and false 
documents (6%). 
Notably, operational results show 
a link between motor vehicle crime 
and document fraud. Along with VIN 
alterations, criminals used twin cars 
equipped with false vehicle registra-
tion documents and licence plates. Some 
of the detected vehicles had problems 
with their supporting documents (insur-
ance, power of attorney, lease or rental 
contract, etc.), while others had been 
bought or rented by middlemen using 
false identity documents. Some market 
requirements also influenced manipula-
tion attempts, e.g. emission certifica-
tion, age and origin of the vehicle, etc.
The vehicles were usually driven 
by one driver using the stolen car as a 
means of transport. A typical modus oper-
andi involves exporting the vehicle imme-
diately after the theft to a neighbouring 
country or across the EU’s external bor-
ders, often using false vehicle registra-
tion documents and licence plates, or 
dismantling it into separate parts. Most 
of the detections at the EU’s external 
6.5  Cross-Border Crime: Detections of Stolen Vehicles
Source: Frontex joint operations data and EUROSUR data as of 15 February 2021
43 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
borders were on exit (61%), which along 
with the lower rate of reporting, led to 
a significant drop in inbound smug-
gling. Land BCPs at the Eastern land 
borders (58%) and in southeast Europe 
(29%) were the most preferred locations 
for exporting stolen vehicles out of the 
EU towards Eastern Europe, Asia and the 
Middle East. The big share of seizures at 
the EU’s internal borders (32%) and in-
land (11%) close to border areas indicates 
that Europe (mostly southeast and cen-
tral Europe) is also a big market for sto-
len vehicles. 
While most of the detections were at 
land borders (87%), some of the stolen 
vehicles were seized close to seaports in 
Northern and Western Europe, as well 
as in the Black Sea region. These sei-
zures related to cars and parts destined 
for markets in West and North Africa 
and Eastern Europe. Additionally, cars 
were transported on platforms, inside 
semitrailers, or dismantled into parts 
inside cargo vans. These attempts would 
increase in times of impeded movement 
of persons. 
The dismantling and distribution of 
stolen vehicle parts in EU Member States 
and in third countries is a lucrative crim-
inal business. Criminals often steel parts 
from popular vehicle makes and mod-
els, which made them very difficult to 
trace. Expensive electronic equipment 
(e.g. navigation systems, trip record-
ers, ECUs, etc.) also attracted perpetra-
tors who sought high-profit margins. On 
occasion, stolen vehicles were disman-
tled into parts purely for transportation 
across borders and afterwards reassem-
bled in the destination country. 
The distribution of fake and substand-
ard vehicle spare parts especially online 
is a particular modus operandi with a grow-
ing influence on the spare parts market. 
Usually, the substandard parts originate 
from countries outside the EU and are re-
packaged in the EU using fake packag-
ing and false quality markings. 
Reasons for Detection 
of Vehicles 2020
Detections of Stolen Vehicles
EU's External Borders
Top 5 countries of origin 
of stolen vehicles in 2020
8%
70%
11%
9%
2%
SIS hit
Stolen
Vehicle Identification Number (VIN) altered
Interpol hit
False Doc.
2%
58%
29%
6%
5%
Eastern Land
Balkans
Black Sea
North Sea
Other
21%
14%
10%
44%
6%5%
DEU
ITA
GBR
FRA
ESP
Other
Source: Frontex joint operations data and EUROSUR data as of 15 February 2021
44 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
6.6 Border Guards’ Workload and Air Borders
Compared to 2019, one may imagine that 
2020 would have been a year of reduced 
workload for the border guarding com-
munity: Passenger flow at the external 
borders dropped to less than one third of 
the total for 2019. After passenger flow 
fell to its COVID-19 low in April, traffic 
at the land borders rebounded the quick-
est, despite remaining far below 2019 
figures. In absolute terms, air traffic 
showed the biggest drop in passengers. 
Whereas in previous years, marginally 
more passengers crossed the air borders, 
in 2020 slightly more passengers crossed 
the land borders. Finally, the sea bor-
ders saw the strongest relative decline in 
passenger flow, probably driven by the 
restrictions on ferries and cruise lines.
It would be a premature conclusion, 
however, to say that 2020 was a calm 
year. Passenger flow figures fail to cap-
ture the full workload of border guards. 
The more immediate reason why 2020 
was a more difficult year than it may 
seem is one of statistics: Passenger flows 
are reported for the external borders, but 
in 2020 the reintroduction of internal bor-
der checks on account of the pandemic 
suddenly consumed substantial human 
resources. This of course widely differed 
across Member States according to their 
adopted measures, the geographies of 
their borders and the amount of cross-
border traffic. On the other hand, bor-
der guard authorities faced a human 
resource shortage (caused by the large 
numbers of personnel on sick leave or 
quarantined) in the context of a more 
complex operational environment: Al-
though the number of passengers 
shrank, the complexity of procedures 
at the border, including measures to pre-
vent the spread of the corona virus, in-
creased. This is reflected in refusals of 
entry, where refusals recorded in cate-
gory I (which includes refusals on health 
grounds) multiplied in 2020.
As regards the second line at border-
crossing points, while refusals of entry 
overall fell in line with the passenger 
flow, detections of illegal stay on exit 
even increased compared with 2019 due 
to a strong increase of illegal stay detec-
tions at the land borders.
The steep drop in traffic flows in 2020 
temporarily reduced the need for staff at 
many BCPs; however, when the traffic 
rebounds, several Member States will 
likely again face the challenge of inad-
equate staffing. In the future, flexible 
deployments of the EBCG standing corps 
could alleviate such challenges.
Air Borders
The COVID-19 pandemic caused an over-
all decrease of around 60% in European 
air traffic from March 2020 until the 
end of the year. A small recovery in the 
summer was only temporary, as large-
scale global travel restrictions were re-
introduced following the resurgence of 
the pandemic. 
It was therefore inevitable that there 
was a decrease in the number of irregu-
lar migrants at external EU MS/SAC air 
borders as well as intra EU MS/SAC ones. 
Both asylum applications and refusals of 
entry decreased dramatically.
However, 2020 can be regarded as an 
anomaly, as the previous three years re-
corded year-on-year increases in irregu-
lar migration at air borders. 
Overall asylum applications fell dras-
tically from 17 598 in 2019 to 4 029 in 
2020. Likewise, refusals of entry fell from 
64 928 to 31 064. Moreover, a total of 5 350 
fraudulent or fraudulently obtained doc-
uments were encountered at the external 
air borders, a decrease of 50% compared 
with 2019.
In 2020, 3  808 migrants were de-
tected with fraudulent documents seek-
ing to board intra-Schengen flights. Of 
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
0 20 40 60 80 100
2020
2019
2020
2019
Passenger Flow 
on Entry to EU/SAC
AIR BORDER LAND BORDER SEA BORDER
Illegal Stay 
on Exit for EU/SAC
Millions of passengers
Thousands of illegal stayers
Source: FRAN data as of 15 February 2021
45 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
Europe
( ECAC)
North Atlantic
South Atlantic
Asia/Pacific
Southern Africa
Other
Europe
Middle-East
North Africa
Mid Atlantic
Trac evolution between worldwide regions
13-01-2021 vs. 16-01-2019
ECAC = 44 European States
Source © EUROCONTROL
-57%
-67%
-47%
-59%
-51%
-61%
-66%
-46%
-65%
these, a further 831 arrived at their in-
tended Schengen destination and usu-
ally claimed asylum. This compares with 
5 620 and 964 respectively in 2019.
Few major changes in trends or modi 
operandi were identified in 2020. Migrants 
continued to use the transit without 
visa concession, with some 736 claim-
ing asylum in 2020. This, however, is 
down on the 1 819 that claimed asylum 
in 2019. Most applications were predicta-
bly made at the larger EU airports linked 
with national carriers with wide global 
networks. Madrid (MAD), with its high 
connectivity to South America, had the 
highest number. This is because many 
South American countries have liberal 
visa and entry requirements that make 
them favourable transit countries for mi-
grants seeking to travel to an EU MS/SAC.
In line with the contraction in air 
traffic, the number of Turkish asylum 
seekers also decreased. However, their 
share of the total still remained high.
The number of asylum applications 
from Venezuelans, which has remained 
high over the last two years, also de-
clined, as did the number of Venezuelan 
in-country asylum applications.
Brazilian, Albanian, Georgian and 
Ukrainian nationals continued to be the 
top-ranking nationalities refused entry. 
Most are believed to have been seeking 
to enter EU MS/SAC to work illegally. 
Migrants, predominantly Albanian 
nationals, continued to seek to enter 
the UK and Ireland from EU MS/SAC air-
ports using fraudulent documentation. 
Many practiced document swapping in 
non-Schengen lounges by checking in 
with their genuine passports for a re-
turn flight to their home country, and 
then used self-printed boarding passes 
to board a flight to the UK or Ireland 
with fraudulent EU MS/SAC passports or 
ID cards with the same identities as on 
the boarding passes. For many airports 
in EU MS/SAC, the identification of such 
migrants on exit to the UK and Ireland 
constitutes the vast majority of cases of 
fraudulent documentation that they en-
counter. In 2019, there were 4 597 such 
cases, while in 2020 the figure was 2 019.
There is evidence that migrants seek 
to use specific third-country airports 
close to EU MS/SAC land borders to ille-
gally travel onwards to EU MS/SAC over 
the green borders. These include Bel-
grade (BEG), Sarajevo (SJJ) and Kyiv 
(KBP). Indian, Iraqi, Tunisian and Turk-
ish migrants have been identified using 
such routes.
Some economic migrants have been 
identified avoiding COVID-19 quarantine 
requirements by chartering flights in 
groups to fly to a third country airport 
close to MS/SAC external borders. They 
then use pre-arranged charted coaches 
to cross MS/SAC land borders at BCPs 
thereby utilising the current EU land 
transit provisions that permit them to 
travel to their final destination. This ar-
rangement obviates the requirement for 
these migrants to have to quarantine, 
something they would have had to do if 
they had flown directly to their final des-
tination. These migrants want to avoid 
quarantine as they wish to start work-
ing illegally as soon as possible. Also it 
is unlikely that they would have spon-
sors prepared to accommodate them for 
extended periods of self-isolation. Mol-
dovan nationals have been identified in 
such groups of over 200 at a time, seek-
ing to fly to Turkey, Albania and North 
Macedonia and then seeking to cross EU 
MS/SAC land borders before traveling on-
wards to their final destination. 
7. Outlook
It is probable that COVID-19 will con-
tinue to significantly affect European in-
tegrated border management for much 
of 2021. Cross-border crime and terror-
ism, as well as the progressive impact 
of megatrends, will influence it in ma-
jor ways. The introduction of new Eu-
ropean policies may contribute to more 
effectively confronting the many chal-
lenges ahead. 
In the short term, COVID-19 will con-
tinue to affect travel across the EU’s ex-
ternal borders. Vaccine production and 
distribution, as well as the vaccination 
process itself, will compound the am-
biguities of pandemic management 
efforts:
 <U+25AA> The emergence of more resilient, in-
fectious coronavirus variants has 
made the path to recovery uncertain;
 <U+25AA> False vaccination certificates, the 
possibility of a rise in the smuggling 
of genuine, counterfeit or deteri-
orated vaccines and COVID-19-re-
lated medical supplies and/or PPE 
may put additional pressure on bor-
der management authorities; 
 <U+25AA> Geographic fault lines between the 
vaccine haves and have-nots are 
likely to re-shape migratory routes 
and/or affect traveller flows.
The decreased trend of international 
travel is expected to continue, encour-
aging migrants to use mixed routes to 
reach the EU, particularly from countries 
with the worst economic problems. Ir-
regular migration via air routes will be 
strictly linked to the resumption of air 
traffic and the economic situation in 
third countries. 
Organised crime groups will con-
tinue to operate at the EU’s external 
borders, adapting their modi operandi to 
the changes in EU border controls. Pan-
demic measures in third countries (of 
origin as well as transit) will continue 
to restrict people’s movements, and in-
advertently contribute to the creation 
of a complex network of routes both 
within and outside familiar routes of 
irregular migration, as observed in the 
Canary Islands. 
Geography is a key determinant, as 
the lifting of one country’s restrictions 
may result in an immediate, significant 
resumption of migrant smuggling. Pro-
longed lockdowns in other transit coun-
tries may encourage re-routing. Of those 
arriving to European shores, a subset of 
asylum seekers may try to misuse the 
mechanism to the detriment of bona 
46 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
fide applicants, as the underlying in-
centive structure remains unchanged. 
Critical health risks in countries of 
origin will hamper returns, acting as 
an additional pull factor. 
All considered, the potential shifts 
in routings combined with the possible 
scale and vigour of movements may re-
quire the swift redeployment of border 
and coast guards. Towards that end, the 
EBCG standing corps represents a valua-
ble resource for Member States. 
In the medium term, the impact of mi-
gration, cross-border crime and terror-
ism will continue to require effective 
border management as a key tool for 
the mitigation of security threats in the 
EU. However, the effectiveness of border 
management will continue to depend on 
whole-of-sector and whole-of-govern-
ment approaches where needed, as bor-
der and coast guards are just one part of 
a sustainable response to cross-border se-
curity threats. The following likely sce-
narios will therefore require a holistic 
approach to reduce their impact:
 <U+25AA> Increasing social inequalities and 
asymmetrical economic recoveries 
worldwide will likely contribute to 
an increase in cross-border crimi-
nality on the EU’s external borders;
 <U+25AA> After the lifting of internal border 
controls and the relaxation of pro-
phylactic measures at the borders, or-
ganised crime groups (OCGs) might 
revert to modi operandi used in the 
pre-crisis period;
 <U+25AA> The prolongation in economic down-
turns in certain countries of origin 
and transit might act as a strong push 
factor for international migration;
 <U+25AA> The demand for smuggled goods in 
the EU will likely remain high in the 
post-pandemic period; 
 <U+25AA> The smuggling of fake (COVID-19-re-
lated) medical products may persist 
as long as there is demand for vac-
cines and medicines in global and 
European markets;
 <U+25AA> The reactivation of traditional air 
routes will most likely lead to in-
creased migratory flows, as it will 
ease travel, reduce cost and decrease 
uncertainty. Air traffic trends will 
likely return to pre-pandemic levels at 
least in the next two years, although 
this will depend on the recovery of 
the air transport industry and the 
progress of vaccination programmes; 
 <U+25AA> Border controls might include in the 
future checks of vaccination certifi-
cates in order to allow unrestricted 
international travel.
European border management will hence 
face less erratic flows than in the short 
term. While migratory movements may 
have a more regular pattern, they may 
also be of increased magnitude, war-
ranting increased resources put to more 
effective use. 
The lifting of internal border con-
trols will likely lead to a return to pre-
pandemic levels of intra-Schengen 
movements as a proportion of overall 
arrivals to the Schengen area. 
On the policy side, the European Pact 
on Migration and Asylum, together with 
the progressive implementation of the 
EBCG Regulation (including the deploy-
ment of the EBCG standing corps), as 
well as the introduction of new exter-
nal borders control systems, are expected 
to enhance European integrated border 
management. In particular, improved 
cooperation at European and national 
level, together with the operational de-
ployment of ETIAS and EES, will boost 
the effectiveness of EU border manage-
ment significantly, including with re-
gard to the fight against organised crime 
and terrorism. The implementation of 
the interoperability mechanism in the 
framework of an integrated and mod-
ern migration and border management 
system, with an enhanced Eurodac da-
tabase and a new compulsory pre-entry 
screening system, will disrupt the ac-
tivities of criminal groups that supply 
false documents and facilitate illegal 
border-crossings. 
In the long term, the megatrends rele-
vant to integrated border management 
will inform the scenarios that the EU 
must take into account. However, recent 
strategic foresight indicates that last-
ing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic 
could influence megatrends for the next 
decade. These developments need to be 
closely monitored, as they may have ex-
tensive implications for EU border man-
agement. This will require a continued 
strategic approach to the monitoring 
and identification of future threats and 
challenges to assess and understand 
the global risk environment with the 
purpose of informing policy and opera-
tional responses that pertain to EIBM. 
47 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
LEGEND
Symbols and abbreviations: n.a. not applicable
           : data not available
Source: FRAN and EDF-RAN data as of 15 February 2021, unless otherwise indicated
Note:   ‘Member States’ in the tables refer to FRAN Member States, including 
both 27 EU Member States and three Schengen Associated Countries.
8. Statistical annex
48 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
Annex Table 1.  Illegal border-crossing between BCPs, on entry
Detections at the external borders by Member State, border type, gender and age group
2017 2018 2019 2020
Share of  
total
% change  
on prev. year Highest share
Border Type Nationality
Sea  176 211  113 643  106 246  86 270 69 -19 Morocco (19%)
Land  28 539  35 474  35 600  38 956 31 9.4 Syria (48%)
Gender Nationality
Female :  28 547  32 987  10 467 8.4 -68 Syria (18%)
Male :  113 770  106 690  108 372 87 1.6 Syria (18%)
Not available  204 750  6 800  2 169  6 387 5.1 194 Tunisia (30%)
Age Group* Nationality
Adult  146 736  114 183  96 947  85 065 68 -12 Morocco (19%)
Minor  32 443  30 948  32 554  15 004 12 -54 Afghanistan (14%)
Not available  32 443  26 430  4 009  3 444 2.8 -14 Unspec. sub-Saharan nationals (39%)
Unaccompanied :  3 753  5 003  5 611 4.5 12 Tunisia (27%)
Accompanied :  765  23 542  5 949 4.8 -75 Afghanistan (30%)
Not available  25 571  3 986  12 345  25 157 20 104 Syria (65%)
Total  204 750  149 117  141 846  125 226 100 -12
49 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
Annex Table 2. Illegal border-crossing between BCPs, on entry
Detections reported by border type and top ten nationalities at the external borders
2017 2018 2019 2020
Share of  
total
% change  
on prev. year
All Borders
Syria  19 452  14 378  24 339  21 581 17 -11
Morocco  11 279  13 498  8 020  17 121 14 113
Algeria  7 443  6 101  5 314  13 247 11 149
Tunisia  6 520  5 230  2 799  13 191 11 371
Unspecified sub-Saharan nationals  0  69  14 346  12 628 10 -12
Afghanistan  7 576  12 666  34 154  10 089 8.1 -70
Bangladesh  9 384  2 043  2 254  5 414 4.3 140
Turkey  2 957  8 412  7 880  3 947 3.2 -50
Pakistan  10 015  4 988  3 799  2 603 2.1 -31
Côte d'Ivoire  13 085  5 269  1 500  2 225 1.8 48
All Other  117 039  76 463  37 441  23 180 19 -38
Total all borders  204 750  149 117  141 846  125 226 100 -12
Land Border
Syria  3 122  6 083  7 546  18 697 48 148
Afghanistan  3 684  2 863  5 812  5 746 15 -1.1
Turkey  2 648  7 954  7 322  3 709 9.5 -49
Albania  6 502  4 576  2 055  1 429 3.7 -30
Pakistan  5 281  2 883  2 109  1 071 2.7 -49
Iraq  1 778  3 348  2 256  977 2.5 -57
Bangladesh  260  855  1 386  887 2.3 -36
Palestine*  104  480  379  692 1.8 83
Morocco  89  112  197  668 1.7 239
Libya  92  102  85  637 1.6 649
All Other  4 979  6 218  6 453  4 443 11 -31
Total land borders  28 539  35 474  35 600  38 956 100 9.4
Sea Border
Morocco  11 190  13 386  7 823  16 453 19 110
Tunisia  6 489  5 204  2 699  12 994 15 381
Algeria  7 194  5 943  5 089  12 979 15 155
Unspecified sub-Saharan nationals  0  69  14 191  12 627 15 -11
Bangladesh  9 124  1 188  868  4 527 5.2 422
Afghanistan  3 892  9 803  28 342  4 343 5 -85
Syria  16 330  8 295  16 793  2 884 3.3 -83
Côte d'Ivoire  12 931  5 219  1 462  2 198 2.5 50
Sudan  6 319  2 123  1 886  1 811 2.1 -4
Somalia  3 106  1 194  3 049  1 797 2.1 -41
All Other  99 636  61 219  24 044  13 657 16 -43
Total sea borders  176 211  113 643  106 246  86 270 100 -19
*  This designation shall not be construed as recognition of a State of Palestine and is without prejudice to the individual positions of the Member States on this issue.
50 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
Annex Table 3.  Illegal border-crossing between BCPs, on entry
Detections reported by routes and top three nationalities at the external borders
Routes 2017 2018 2019 2020
Share of  
total
% change  
on prev. year
Central Mediterranean Route  118 962  23 485  14 003  35 673 28 155
Tunisia  6 415  5 182  2 690  12 985 36 383
Bangladesh  9 009  583  750  4 447 12 493
Côte d'Ivoire  9 509  1 191  1 304  2 065 5.8 58
All Other  94 029  16 529  9 259  16 176 45 75
Western Balkan Route  12 179  5 869  15 152  26 969 22 78
Syria  634  323  4 643  16 644 62 258
Afghanistan  3 388  1 669  5 338  5 251 19 -1.6
Iraq  960  300  1 498  749 2.8 -50
All Other  7 197  3 577  3 673  4 325 16 18
Western African Route  421  1 323  2 718  23 029 18 747
Morocco  106  902  949  11 759 51 n.a.
Unspecified sub-Saharan nationals  0  0  1 709  10 620 46 521
Mali  1  11  48  290 1.3 504
All Other  314  410  12  360 1.6 n.a.
Eastern Mediterranean Route  42 319  56 561  83 333  20 283 16 -76
Sea  34 732  34 014  65 963  10 434 51 -84
Afghanistan  3 713  9 597  28 273  3 422 33 -88
Syria  13 957  8 173  16 707  2 638 25 -84
Somalia  243  737  2 630  777 7.4 -70
All Other  16 819  15 507  18 353  3 597 34 -80
Land  7 587  22 547  17 370  9 849 49 -43
Turkey  2 220  7 468  6 619  3 486 35 -47
Syria  2 438  5 733  2 897  2 031 21 -30
Pakistan  901  1 823  1 556  771 7.8 -50
All Other  2 028  7 523  6 298  3 561 36 -43
Western Mediterranean Route  23 063  56 245  23 969  17 228 14 -28
Sea  21 552  54 820  23 557  17 132 99 -27
Algeria  4 287  4 339  4 007  11 455 67 186
Morocco  4 704  11 881  6 336  3 521 21 -44
Unspecified sub-Saharan nationals .  69  12 482  2 007 12 -84
All Other  12 561  38 531  732  149 0.9 -80
Land  1 511  1 425  412  96 0.6 -77
Mali  6  216  102  62 65 -39
Burkina Faso  109  245  34  8 8.3 -76
Morocco  0  0  0  7 7.3 n.a.
All Other  1 396  964  276  19 20 -93
Circular Route from Albania to Greece  6 396  4 550  1 944  1 365 1.1 -30
Albania  6 220  4 319  1 867  1 326 97 -29
Iraq  14  17  5  13 1 160
All Other  154  208  68  20 1.5 -71
Eastern Borders Route  872  1 084  722  677 0.5 -6.2
Russia  69  84  56  109 16 95
Turkey  47  76  77  67 9.9 -13
Ukraine  105  75  57  54 8 -5.3
All Other  651  849  532  447 66 -16
Black Sea Route  537  0  2  0 n.a. n.a.
Other  1  0  3  2 0 -33
Total  204 750  149 117  141 846  125 226 100 -12
51 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
Annex Table 4. Clandestine entries at land and sea BCPs
Detections reported by Member State, border type, age group, gender and top ten nationalities
2017 2018 2019 2020
Share of  
total
% change  
on prev. year Highest share
Border Type Nationality
Land  1 207  1 998  2 119  1 822 80 -14 Afghanistan (70%)
Sea  415  260  431  464 20 8 Albania (46%)
Age Group Nationality
Adult  604  1 709  2 436  1 725 75 -29 Afghanistan (53%)
Minor  53  391  113  93 4.1 -18 Tunisia (56%)
Not available  965  158  1  468 20 n.a. Afghanistan (75%)
Gender Nationality
Female .  145  84  114 5 36 Albania (61%)
Male .  2 101  2 464  2 169 95 -12 Afghanistan (59%)
Not available  1 622  12  2  3 0.1 50 Iran (67%)
Top Ten Nationalities
Afghanistan  490  1 041  1 646  1 275 56 -23
Albania  75  31  33  228 10 591
Tunisia  47  59  263  146 6.4 -44
Syria  115  64  51  134 5.9 163
Morocco  48  43  45  125 5.5 178
Pakistan  47  245  69  60 2.6 -13
Turkey  49  65  49  51 2.2 4.1
Kosovo*  7  36  9  39 1.7 333
Iran  32  118  42  35 1.5 -17
Bangladesh  11  84  33  33 1.4 0
All Other  701  472  310  160 7 -48
Total  1 622  2 258  2 550  2 286  100 -10
* This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSCR 1244 and the ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo* declaration of independence.
52 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
Annex Table 5. Facilitators
Detections reported at the external borders, by Member State, place of detection and top ten nationalities
2017 2018 2019 2020
Share of  
total
% change  
on prev. year Highest share
Place of Detection Nationality
Inland  4 397  4 958  4 912  4 657 52 -5.2 Unknown (12%)
Land  4 197  2 139  1 804  1 979 22 9.7 Romania (10%)
Not available  327  3 033  3 765  1 918 21 -49 Morocco (23%)
Sea  1 032  402  404  310 3.5 -23 Iran (16%)
Air  293  110  104  78 0.9 -25 Syria (23%)
Top Ten Nationalities
Unknown  781  614  488  698 7.8 43
Morocco  804  696  1 039  604 6.8 -42
France  435  655  595  567 6.3 -4.7
Italy  477  439  494  548 6.1 11
Syria  369  522  460  484 5.4 5.2
Iraq  259  295  409  359 4 -12
Albania  650  609  758  347 3.9 -54
Romania  431  176  213  336 3.8 58
Pakistan  370  503  411  305 3.4 -26
Tunisia  139  353  164  301 3.4 84
All Other  5 531  5 780  5 958  4 393 49 -26
Total  10 246  10 642  10 989  8 942 100 -19
53 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
Annex Table 6. Illegal stay
Detections reported by Member State, place of detection, age group, gender and top ten nationalities
2017 2018 2019 2020
Share of  
total
% change  
on prev. year Highest share
Place of Detection Nationality
Inland  352 750  273 807  307 248  269 894 73 -12 Morocco (11%)
on Exit  82 329  91 929  92 411  95 885 26 3.8 Ukraine (36%)
Not available  5  1 530  3 419  4 395 1.2 29 Afghanistan (20%)
Age Group Nationality
Adult :  236 900  359 515  339 959 92 -5.4 Ukraine (13%)
Minor :  21 052  22 227  17 980 4.9 -19 Afghanistan (22%)
Not available  435 084  109 314  21 336  12 235 3.3 -43 Algeria (10%)
Gender Nationality
Female :  38 957  62 069  62 415 17 0.6 Ukraine (24%)
Male :  154 294  247 782  239 845 65 -3.2 Ukraine (13%)
Not available  435 084  174 015  93 227  67 914 18 -27 Eritrea (18%)
Top Ten Nationalities
Ukraine  32 608  36 299  39 759  46 012 12 16
Morocco  29 859  21 891  32 669  31 992 8.6 -2.1
Algeria  19 892  16 383  21 409  22 613 6.1 5.6
Albania  24 801  21 639  24 994  21 861 5.9 -13
Moldova  8 340  9 536  13 990  20 414 5.5 46
Afghanistan  21 177  14 104  15 675  18 129 4.9 16
Syria  12 885  9 248  9 433  16 167 4.4 71
Eritrea  12 995  10 626  14 470  14 552 3.9 0.6
Pakistan  19 624  15 605  19 207  14 277 3.9 -26
Serbia  11 371  10 469  9 597  13 267 3.6 38
All Other  241 532  201 466  201 875  150 890 41 -25
Total  435 084  367 266  403 078  370 174  100 -8
54 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
Annex Table 7. Refusals of entry
Refusals of entry at the external borders reported by Member State, border type, age group, gender and top ten nationalities
2017 2018 2019 2020
Share of  
total
% change  
on prev. year Highest share
Border Type Nationality
Land  126 456  131 641  145 494  102 448 78 -30 Ukraine (52%)
Air  48 924  54 952  62 859  26 208 20 -58 Ukraine (12%)
Sea  7 192  4 037  4 129  2 782 2.1 -33 Albania (33%)
Not available  0  28  5  1 0 -80 Brazil (100%)
Age Group Nationality
Adult :  141 049  175 356  123 447 94 -30 Ukraine (45%)
Minor :  14 757  19 411  4 999 3.8 -74 Russia (46%)
Not available  182 572  34 852  17 720  2 993 2.3 -83 Russia (22%)
Gender Nationality
Female :  42 185  53 271  30 583 23 -43 Ukraine (45%)
Male :  105 198  132 998  92 547 70 -30 Ukraine (45%)
Not available  182 572  43 275  26 218  8 309 6.3 -68 Brazil (17%)
Top Ten nationalities
Ukraine  37 071  57 576  70 313  56 005 43 -20
Albania  31 861  24 386  21 630  11 626 8.8 -46
Moldova  5 930  6 378  6 174  8 668 6.6 40
Russia  36 335  25 951  34 546  8 270 6.3 -76
Bosnia and Herzegovina  3 774  4 142  3 316  6 672 5.1 101
Serbia  7 727  7 658  7 198  6 321 4.8 -12
Belarus  7 660  7 955  7 691  5 514 4.2 -28
Turkey  4 662  4 836  4 767  3 137 2.4 -34
Brazil  3 079  4 973  7 073  2 436 1.9 -66
Georgia  2 601  4 094  5 154  1 895 1.4 -63
All Other  41 872  42 709  44 625  20 895 16 -53
Total  182 572  190 658  212 487  131 439  100 -38
55 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
Annex Table 8. Reasons for refusals of entry
Refusals of entry at the external borders reported by reasons for refusal, Member State and top ten nationalities
Refusal persons  
Total
Reasons for refusals of entry (see description below) Reasons 
TotalA B C D E F G H I n.a.
Top Ten nationalities
Ukraine  56 005  70  46  1 515  26  29 539  4 223  2 880  4 051  10 065  4 004  56 419
Albania  11 626  72  47  264  10  5 460  970  744  2 629  1 590  131  11 917
Moldova  8 668  13  2  217  17  5 497  635  249  797  1 230  91  8 748
Russia  8 270  39  14  4 320  64  468  81  200  117  1 560  1 604  8 467
Bosnia and Herzegovina  6 672  56  5  94  0  5 688  102  241  260  319  10  6 775
Serbia  6 321  208  59  156  10  2 352  1 379  220  1 129  849  22  6 384
Belarus  5 514  25  3  865  2  773  115  201  134  1 287  2 149  5 554
Turkey  3 137  113  64  1 061  27  383  317  71  129  874  157  3 196
Brazil  2 436  10  8  598  3  826  55  165  83  712  211  2 671
Georgia  1 895  17  5  51  0  689  88  218  525  348  99  2 040
All Other  20 895  2 457  480  3 449  197  4 934  729  1 046  1 150  6 127  2 833  23 402
Total  131 439  3 080  733  12 590  356  56 609  8 694  6 235  11 004  24 961  11 311  135 573
Descriptions of the reasons for refusal of entry:
A has no valid travel document(s);
B has a false / counterfeit / forged travel document;
C has no valid visa or residence permit;
D has a false / counterfeit / forged visa or residence permit;
E has no appropriate documentation justifying the purpose and conditions of stay;
F has already stayed for three months during a six months period on the territory of the Member States of the European Union;
G does not have sufficient means of subsistence in relation to the period and form of stay, or the means to return to the country of origin or transit;
H is a person for whom an alert has been issued for the purposes of refusing entry in the SIS or in the national register;
I  is considered to be a threat for public policy, internal security, public health or the international relations of one or more Member States of the European Union;
56 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
Annex Table 9. Persons using fraudulent documents
Detections on entry at the external borders, by Member State, border type and top ten nationalities
2017 2018 2019 2020
Share of  
total
% change  
on prev. year Highest share
Border Type Nationality Reported
Land  1 870  1 324  1 085  2 077 55 92 Ukraine (57%)
Air  3 147  3 131  3 450  1 466 40 -57 Unknown (13%)
Sea  669  848  693  176 4.8 -74 Morocco (88%)
Top Ten Nationalities
Ukraine  787  392  249  1 258 34 405
Turkey  251  286  402  264 7.1 -34
Unknown  257  313  244  198 5.3 -19
Morocco  856  900  746  196 5.3 -73
Russia  269  224  119  172 4.6 45
Moldova  82  56  99  166 4.5 69
Kosovo*  103  99  155  92 2.5 -41
Albania  199  113  145  77 2.1 -47
Syria  176  139  131  75 2 -43
Serbia  76  71  64  75 2 17
All Other  2 630  2 710  2 874  1 146 31 -60
Total  5 686  5 303  5 228  3 719  100 -29
Note: Data are not available for December 2020 from France, Lithuania, Romania and Spain.
* This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSCR 1244 and the ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo* declaration of independence.
57 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
Annex Table 10. Fraudulent documents used
Detections on entry at the external borders, by country of issuance of the document and type of document 
2017 2018 2019 2020
Share of  
total
% change  
on prev. year Highest share
Country of issuance Type of Document
Poland  795  433  286  1 455 31 409 Other (85%)
France  633  581  720  372 7.9 -48 Passport (35%)
Spain  926  1 037  895  310 6.6 -65 Id Card (38%)
Germany  460  374  439  254 5.4 -42 Residence Permit (42%)
Italy  736  574  616  215 4.5 -65 Residence Permit (27%)
Hungary  123  115  101  169 3.6 67 Border Stamp (93%)
Belgium  204  192  186  141 3 -24 Residence Permit (31%)
Greece  254  211  192  130 2.8 -32 Passport (31%)
Ukraine  56  47  46  97 2.1 111 Passport (57%)
Turkey  118  228  242  92 1.9 -62 Other (81%)
All Other  2 888  2 837  2 877  1 491 32 -48 Passport (41%)
Type of Document Type of Fraud
Other  234  184  164  1 550 33 845 Counterfeit (95%)
Passport  2 235  2 374  2 691  988 21 -63 Impostor (44%)
Border Stamp  1 049  810  699  730 15 4 Counterfeit (93%)
Residence Permit  944  904  855  517 11 -40 Counterfeit (54%)
ID Card  1 093  1 126  1 041  487 10 -53 Counterfeit (54%)
Visa  1 638  1 231  1 150  454 10 -61 Fraudulently obtained (52%)
Total  7 193  6 629  6 600  4 726 100 -28
Note: Data are not available for December 2020 from France, Lithuania, Romania and Spain.
58 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
Annex Table 11. Return decisions issued
Decisions issued by Member State, age group, gender and top ten nationalities
2017 2018 2019 2020
Share of  
total
% change  
on prev. year Highest share
Age Group Nationality
Adult :  170 159  154 894  245 923 78 59 Albania (9%)
Minor :  10 096  9 741  18 678 6 92 Afghanistan (11%)
Not available  282 075  125 727  137 388  51 539 16 -62 Algeria (24%)
Gender Nationality
Male :  205 064  204 824  248 783 79 23 Morocco (9%)
Female :  48 346  49 738  61 523 20 26 Ukraine (9%)
Not available  282 075  52 572  47 461  5 834 1.8 -88 Brazil (29%)
Top Ten Nationalities
Morocco  22 028  22 151  23 553  24 764 7.9 7
Albania  18 015  17 273  17 272  23 581 7.4 38
Afghanistan  18 686  18 969  18 516  21 665 6.9 19
Ukraine  29 303  33 903  33 406  20 449 6.4 -38
Pakistan  14 281  14 458  17 086  19 480 6.1 15
Algeria  9 691  11 375  12 727  18 983 6 51
Syria  8 963  7 559  13 590  14 936 4.7 11
Turkey  4 508  6 207  7 553  11 291 3.6 51
Iraq  19 316  16 816  13 272  9 715 3.1 -25
Tunisia  8 166  6 262  4 355  8 542 2.7 98
All Other  129 118  151 009  140 693  142 734 45 3
Total  282 075  305 982  302 023  316 140 100 6.1
Note: Data for December 2020 are not available from Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus and Poland. Data from Slovenia are not available from January to October 2020.
59 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
Annex Table 12. Effective returns
People effectively returned to third countries by Member State, age group, gender and top ten nationalities
2017 2018 2019 2020
Share of  
total
% change  
on prev. year Highest share
Age Group Nationality
Adult .  76 380  96 053  53 141 80 -44 Ukraine (20%)
Minor .  2 963  5 411  5 141 7.8 -3.3 Albania (12%)
Not available  155 945  68 472  37 913  8 232 12 -78 Morocco (20%)
Gender Nationality
Male .  56 958  75 211  50 417 76 -32 Ukraine (15%)
Female .  16 259  21 374  15 532 23 -27 Ukraine (21%)
Not available  155 945  74 598  42 792  565 0.8 -99 Brazil (55%)
Top Ten Nationalities
Ukraine  24 614  27 264  26 594  10 985 16 -59
Albania  25 790  19 243  15 629  7 686 12 -50
Georgia  3 446  5 021  7 344  4 274 6.4 -41
Serbia  4 496  3 548  3 261  3 158 4.8 -1.7
Moldova  3 415  3 531  4 027  2 470 3.7 -38
Tunisia  3 653  3 854  3 564  2 416 3.6 -32
Morocco  10 047  10 858  9 647  2 403 3.6 -75
Russia  4 573  4 628  4 820  2 093 3.2 -56
Pakistan  6 655  4 305  2 984  1 969 2.9 -34
Turkey  1 925  2 451  2 887  1 884 2.8 -34
All Other  67 331  63 112  58 620  27 176 41 -53
Total  155 945  147 815  139 377  66 514 100 -52
Note: Data for December 2020 are not available from Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus and Poland. Data from Denmark are not available from August 2020. Data from Slovenia are not available from January to October 2020.
60 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
Annex Table 13. Effective returns by type of return
People effectively returned to third countries by type of return and top ten nationalities
2017 2018 2019 2020
Share of  
total
% change  
on prev. year Highest share
Type of Return Nationality
Forced return  79 606  75 030  71 672  26 082 39 -64 Albania (18%)
Not applicable : : :  26 082 100 n.a. Albania (18%)
Enforced by Member State  59 684  54 015  50 614 : n.a. n.a. n.a.
Not available  16 565  18 741  17 218 : n.a. n.a. n.a.
Enforced by Joint Operation  3 357  2 274  3 840 : n.a. n.a. n.a.
Voluntary return  76 013  72 773  67 656  39 100 59 -41 Ukraine (23%)
Without assistance :  33 335  34 342  28 079 71 -18 Ukraine (28%)
Not applicable : : :  11 021 29 n.a. Georgia (11%)
IOM Assisted  18 037  1 538  22 : n.a. n.a. n.a.
Not available  3 996  27 556  22 223 : n.a. n.a. n.a.
Others  53 980  8 442  4 758 : n.a. n.a. n.a.
AVRR :  237  4 179 : n.a. n.a. n.a.
AVR :  1 665  2 132 : n.a. n.a. n.a.
Not available  326  12  49  1 332 2 2 618 Albania (27%)
Total  155 945  147 815  139 377  66 514 100 -52
Top Ten Nationalities
Forced
Albania  21 738  16 341  12 505  4 764 18 -62
Tunisia  3 403  3 545  3 347  2 231 8.5 -33
Morocco  8 936  9 977  9 074  2 096 8 -77
Ukraine  2 249  2 635  2 542  2 006 7.7 -21
Georgia  1 524  2 290  3 514  1 688 6.5 -52
Serbia  3 155  2 594  2 126  1 442 5.5 -32
Moldova  1 280  1 092  1 848  1 060 4.1 -42
Turkey  1 070  1 478  1 342  920 3.5 -31
Algeria  3 410  4 044  4 579  901 3.4 -80
Pakistan  2 112  1 434  1 168  704 2.7 -40
All Other  30 729  29 600  29 627  8 270 32 -72
Total Forced Returns  79 606  75 030  71 672  26 082 100 -64
Voluntary
Ukraine  22 362  24 629  24 052  8 963 23 -63
Albania  3 984  2 901  3 095  2 559 6.6 -16
Georgia  1 904  2 731  3 824  2 515 6.4 -34
Russia  3 057  2 946  3 040  1 586 4.1 -48
Serbia  1 340  954  1 135  1 573 4.1 39
Moldova  2 135  2 439  2 179  1 399 3.6 -34
Brazil  1 322  1 153  1 118  1 370 3.6 26
Pakistan  4 543  2 871  1 816  1 257 3.2 -30
Iraq  4 635  3 945  2 667  1 237 3.2 -53
Colombia  401  441  699  1 233 3.1 78
All Other  30 330  27 763  24 031  15 408 40 -35
Total Voluntary Returns  76 013  72 773  67 656  39 100 100 -42
61 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
Annex Table 14. Passenger flow on entry
Data reported (on voluntary basis) by Member State, border type and top ten nationalities
2017 2018 2019 2020
Share of  
total
% change  
on prev. year Highest share
Border Type Nationality
Land  111 447 809  101 249 852  104 334 084  45 659 299 49 -56 Croatia (16%)
Air  179 475 434  184 938 297  183 234 297  45 066 379 48 -75 Unknown (68%)
Sea  34 126 990  18 912 570  16 752 610  2 540 549 2.7 -85 Unknown (50%)
Groups of nationalities
EU MS/SAC  71 220 539  89 587 420  89 644 947  32 612 570 35 -64
Third-country  62 193 128  65 199 712  64 260 921  20 902 076 22 -67
Not specified  191 636 566  150 313 587  150 415 123  39 751 581 43 -73
Total  325 050 233  305 100 719  304 320 991  93 266 227 100 -69
62 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
Notes on FRAN data sources and methods 
The term ‘Member States’ refers to FRAN 
Member States, which includes the 
27 Member States and three Schengen As-
sociated Countries (Iceland, Norway and 
Switzerland). For the data concerning 
detections at the external borders of the 
EU, some of the border types are not ap-
plicable to all FRAN Member States. This 
pertains to data on all FRAN indicators 
since the data are provided disaggregated 
by border type. The definitions of detec-
tions at land borders are therefore not 
applicable (excluding borders with non-
Schengen principalities) for Belgium, 
the Czech Republic, Denmark, France, 
Germany, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Lux-
embourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Por-
tugal, Sweden, Switzerland and the UK. 
For Cyprus, reported detections along the 
Green Line are linked to arrivals of mi-
grants by sea or air in the areas where 
the Government of the Republic of Cy-
prus does not exercise effective control. 
The Green Line does not constitute an 
external border of the EU according to 
Council Regulation EC No. 866/2004. For 
sea borders, the definitions are not ap-
plicable for land-locked Member States 
including Austria, the Czech Republic, 
Hungary, Luxembourg, Slovakia and 
Switzerland. 
In addition, data on detections of il-
legal border-crossing at land, air and sea 
BCPs (1B) are not available for Iceland, 
Ireland and Spain, and in Greece these 
detections are included in the data for 
indicator 1A. 
Data on detections of illegal border-
crossing between sea BCPs (1A) are not 
available for Ireland. For 2013, data from 
Slovenia include detections at the EU ex-
ternal borders only until June 2013. 
Data on apprehension (FRAN Indi-
cator 2) of facilitators are not available 
for Ireland and UK. For Italy, the data 
are not disaggregated by border type, 
but are reported as total apprehensions 
(not specified). Data for Italy and Nor-
way also include the facilitation of ille-
gal stay and work. For Romania, the data 
include land Intra-EU detections on exit 
at the border with Hungary. 
For the data concerning detections 
of illegal stay (FRAN Indicator 3), data 
on detections on exit are not available 
for Ireland, Italy and the UK. Data on 
detections of illegal stay inland have 
not been available from the Netherlands 
since 2012. 
Data on refusals of entry (FRAN In-
dicator 4) at the external EU borders are 
not disaggregated by reason of refusal 
for Ireland and the UK. 
The data on passenger flow (shared on 
voluntary basis) are not available for Aus-
tria, Ireland, Sweden and the UK. Data 
on passenger flow at the air border are 
not available according to the definition 
for Spain. Data at the sea border are not 
available for Cyprus, Malta, Spain, the 
Netherlands, Romania and Denmark. 
For all indicators, data from Croatia 
are available only starting with July 2013. 
63 of 64
Frontex · Risk Analysis for 2021
Plac Europejski 6 
00-844 Warsaw, Poland
T +48 22 205 95 00 
F +48 22 205 95 01
frontex@frontex.europa.eu 
www.frontex.europa.eu
Reference number: 3665/2021
Paper version: 
TT-AC-21-002-EN-C 
ISBN 978-92-9471-999-7 
doi:10.2819/10063
PDF version: 
TT-AC-21-002-EN-N 
ISBN 978-92-9471-998-0 
doi:10.2819/390202
Printed by the Publications Office  
in Luxembourg

