In 2014, detections of illegal border-crossing reached a new record, with more than  280 000 detections. The unprecedented  number of migrants crossing illegally the  external borders has roots in the fighting in  Syria that has resulted in the worst refugee  crisis since the Second World War. Indeed,  most of the detections at the borders concerned migrants from Syria, who later applied for asylum within the EU. The record number of migrants detected at  the external borders of the EU had several  implications for border-control authorities  and EU internal security: Most of these detections were reported  as part of search and rescue operations in  the Central Mediterranean area. In 2014,  border-control authorities saved the lives  of thousands of people. However, facilitators increasingly utilised unsafe boats,  with the inevitable result that migrants’  lives were put at risk.  The very high demand for illegal crossing  to the EU, fuelled by the record number of  successful entries, also led to a new modus  operandi. Since September 2014, the use of  large cargo ships to transport migrants directly from the Turkish coast near Mersin  to Italy has been reported. This is a multimillion-euro business for organised crime  groups (OCG), which is likely to be replicated in other departure countries. Another  worrying trend has been the increasing  number of deliberate attempts to involve  merchant ships in rescuing migrants. This  has prompted the International Maritime  Organization (IMO) to voice the concerns  of the shipping industry over its involvement in rescuing irregular migrants. With record numbers of migrants crossing the border illegally, resources are devoted to their immediate care, rather  than screening and obtaining information on their basic characteristics such as  nationality. After they are rescued, they  continue their journey to other Member  States and not knowing who is travelling  within the EU is a vulnerability for EU internal security. The profile of detected irregular migrants  remained relatively unchanged compared  to 2013, being mostly adult males. However,  the proportion of women (11%) and children  (15%) reflects the fact that many migrants  move to the EU with the intention of claiming asylum, thereby escaping violence in their  own country. Most migrants were detected in the Central Mediterranean area, where detections  totalled over 170000. On the Eastern Mediterranean route detections totalled over 50  800. Towards the end of 2014, detections  sharply increased at the Hungarian land border with Serbia, making the Western Balkan route (with 43357 detections) the third  most important irregular migration route  towards the EU. Detections of clandestine entry in vehicles increased strongly from 599 in 2013 to 3052 in  2014. This rise was due to a tenfold increase in  detections reported from the Bulgarian BCPs  along the land border with Turkey. In 2014, there were just over 9400 detections  of document fraud cases on entry to the EU/ Schengen area from third countries, which  represented a slight decrease compared to  the previous year. By contrast, cases reported  on intra-EU Schengen movements showed a  marked increase from 7867 in 2013 to 9968  in 2014 (+27%). Thus, for the first time, there  were more fraudulent documents detected  on intra-EU/Schengen movements than during border checks on passengers arriving from  third countries. This is partly due to the large  number of migrants undertaking secondary  movements within the EU, often with fraudulent documents obtained in the country of  their entry into the EU.  The facilitation of illegal migration remains  a significant threat to the EU external borders. Detections of facilitators rose from  7252 in 2013 to 10234 in 2014. The increase  was mostly due to higher numbers reported  in Spain, Italy and Bulgaria. Member States reported more than 114000  refusals of entry issued at the external borders of the EU, a decrease of 11% compared  to 2013. The decrease is the consequence of  the record high of 2013, when an exceptionally large number of Russians of Chechen origin were refused entry because they lacked  a valid visa.  In 2014, there were 441780 detections of illegal stay in the EU, which represents an increase compared to the year before. Most  of the increase was due to a higher number  of detected Syrians and Eritreans who later  applied for asylum. A total of 252003 third-country nationals  were subject to an obligation to leave the  EU as a result of an administrative or judicial decision, which was a 12% increase compared to 2013.  In 2014, there were 161309 third-country nationals effectively returned to countries outside the EU, which was broadly similar to  the numbers returned in 2013. The UK was  the Member State that conducted the largest number of returns (36313), with steady  trends to India and Pakistan. Greece reported  an increase in effective returns, mostly of  Albanians. As regards the wider geopolitical context,  two issues clearly stand out: the conflict in  Syria and the continued volatility in North African countries, notably Libya, from where migrants often depart in their attempt to cross  the Mediterranean Sea. The large number  of displaced Syrians in the Middle East and  North Africa suggests that Syria will likely remain the top country of origin for irregular  migrants and asylum seekers in the EU for  some time to come. In Libya, migrants are  in an extremely vulnerable situation, especially those in areas affected by the fighting.  Migrants in Libya also face arbitrary detention and very poor conditions of detention,  marked by overcrowding, poor sanitation  and exploitation. The ongoing crisis in Ukraine will continue  to be an important factor affecting population movements. However, so far it has not  resulted in marked changes in illegal migration movements towards the EU. The main  development along the eastern land border  has been the reduction in the number of regular passengers from the Russian Federation  to the EU due to the economic downturn. Looking ahead, the likelihood of a large number of illegal border-crossings to the EU is  high and so is the probability of a large number of migrants needing assistance in terms  of search and rescue operations (but also the  provision of international protection), in particular in the southern section of the external  border, on the Eastern Mediterranean  and  the Central Mediterranean routes. Many migrants who cross illegally and apply for asylum  are not detained and thus continue making  their journey within the EU. Most risks associated with document fraud  were assessed as high. Indeed, document  fraudsters not only undermine border security but also the internal security of the EU.  These risks are common to nearly all Member  States, as they are associated with passenger  flows and border checks, which are a specific expertise of border-control authorities.  Most cases of fraud are expected to involve  EU travel documents and there are indications of a shift away from the use of passports towards less sophisticated documents  such as ID cards and residence permits. Overall, there is an underlying threat of terrorism-related travel movements especially  due to the appeal of the Syrian conflict to both  idealist and radicalised youths. The conflict in  Syria has attracted hundreds of foreign fighters, including EU citizens, dual-nationality  holders and other third-country nationals. The Frontex Annual Risk Analysis (ARA) 2015  presents a European summary of trends and  developments along the external borders of  the Member States of the EU. This analysis  is based on information provided to Frontex  by the EU Member States and Schengen Associated countries throughout 2014, as well  as information collected during Frontex Joint  Operations and from open sources. The analysis starts with an overview of the  situation before the border based on data for  Schengen uniform visas. It then looks at the  situation along the external border, based on  trends in regular passenger flows, detections  of illegal border-crossing, clandestine entries  and refusals of entry. Finally, the report provides an update on the situation regarding  persons staying illegally in the EU and thirdcountry nationals returned. Frontex operational activities aim at strengthening border security by ensuring the coordination of Member States’ actions in the  implementation of Community measures  relating to the management of the external  borders. The coordination of operational activities also contributes to better allocation  of Member States’ resources and protection  of the area of freedom, security and justice. The ARA 2015 concentrates on the current  scope of Frontex operational activities, which  focus on irregular migration at the external  borders of EU Member States and Schengen  Associated Countries. In line with the concept of integrated border management (IBM),  border management should not be limited to  controlling illegal migration but also cover  threats to the EU internal security. Thus a full  section is dedicated to the analysis of crossborder crime. The Frontex Risk Analysis Unit (RAU) would  like to express its gratitude to all members  of the Frontex Risk Analysis Network (FRAN)  in Member States for their efforts in providing data and information, as well as Europol,  EASO and the WHO PHAME programme,  which have contributed to the ARA 2015, and  all Frontex colleagues involved in the preparation of this report. A coherent and full analysis of the risks affecting security at the external borders requires, above all, the adoption of common  indicators. Consistent monitoring of these  indicators will then allow effective measures  to be taken on the ground.  The backbone of the ARA 2015 is the monthly  statistics exchanged among Member States  within the framework of the Frontex Risk  Analysis Network (FRAN). This regular dataexchange exercise was launched in September 2007 and then refined in 2008. Thanks to  FRAN members’ efforts, a much larger statistical coverage was achieved in 2011. Additional  requirements were added in 2014, and active  collaboration with EASO means that their  data on asylum applications are now privileged over data collected through the FRAN.  Thus, for the ARA 2015, the key indicators collected through FRAN were: detections of illegal border-crossing through the green border  or at BCPs; refusals of entry; detections of illegal stay; detections of facilitators; detections  of forged documents; return decisions and  effective returns; and passenger flow (when  available). Data on asylum applications are still  being collected within the FRAN, but increasingly Frontex relies on data collected by EASO  to analyse the situation regarding asylum. Data on the number of EU visas issued and  their places of issue would improve the characterisation of third-country passenger flows.  However, this information, which is collected  within the Council’s Visa Working Party and  published by the European Commission, is  not yet available for 2014. For the purpose  of the ARA, data from 2008 to 2013 are discussed as an introduction to the general situation at the borders.  Member States were not requested to answer specific questions in support of this  analysis. Rather, bi-monthly analytical reports  and incident reports of Member States routinely collected within the FRAN were used  as important sources of information, especially as regards the analysis of routes and  modi operandi. Open-source information was also effectively  exploited, especially in identifying the main  push and pull factors for irregular migration to  the EU. Among others, these sources included  reports issued by government agencies, international and non-governmental organisations, as well as official EU reports, such as  the European Commission’s reports on third  countries, and mainstream news agencies. In addition, Frontex organised an Annual Analytical Review to consolidate the risk analyses presented in the FRAN Quarterlies for  2014 and also to gather knowledge on likely  risks of irregular migration at the EU’s external borders. Participants of the FRAN were  invited in January 2015 to review and comment on the risks identified at the external  borders during a one-day exercise. The data exchange was overseen by Frontex  involving national border-control authorities.  Data were categorised by border type (land,  air and sea) and those on land borders were  additionally categorised by border section  with neighbouring third countries. The data exchanged within the FRAN are  compiled and analysed on a quarterly basis.  Priority is given to the use of data for management purposes and to its fast sharing  among Member State border-control authorities. Member States’ data processed by  Frontex are not treated as official statistics  and thus may occasionally vary from those  officially published by national authorities. Throughout 2014, some FRAN members performed backdated updates of their 2013 statistics. These updates have been accounted  for in this document and so some data presented herein may differ from the data presented a year ago in the Annual Risk Analysis  2014. External borders refer to the borders between Member States and third countries.  The borders, if any, between the Schengen  Associated Countries (Liechtenstein, Norway,  Iceland and Switzerland) and third countries  are also considered as external borders. The  borders between the Schengen Associated  Countries and Schengen Member States are  considered as internal borders. For indicators  on detections of facilitators, illegal stay and  asylum, statistics are also reported for detections at the land borders, if any, between  the Schengen Member States and Member  States not yet part of the Schengen area (Bulgaria, Romania, Croatia, Cyprus) or Member  States that have opted-out from Schengen  (the UK, Ireland), so that a total for EU Member States and Schengen Associated Countries as a whole can be presented. It was not  possible to make this distinction for air and  sea borders because Member States do not  habitually differentiate between extra-EU  and intra-EU air and sea connections but tend  to aggregate data for all arrivals per airport. Quality of available data Consistent with other law-enforcement indicators, variations in administrative data  related to border control depend on several  factors. In this case, the number of detections  of illegal border-crossing and refusals of entry are both functions of the amount of effort spent detecting irregular migrants and  the actual flow of irregular migrants to the  EU. For example, increased detections of illegal border-crossing might be due to a real  increase in the flow of irregular migrants  or may in fact be an outcome of more resources made available to detect them. In  exceptional cases, increased resources may  produce a rise in reported detections while  effectively masking an actual decrease in the  flow of migrants, resulting from a strong deterrent effect. Information on national-level resources for  border-control authorities and their allocation  is currently only partially known by Frontex.  These data are provided by Member States  themselves either within the Schengen evaluation mechanism or within the External  Borders Fund (EBF) reporting. Without systematic and reliable information on resources  allocated to border control and without estimates of irregular migration flows, it is not  possible to assess the performance and impact of the border controls put in place and  the analyses of the situation at the EU’s external borders are limited to descriptive statistics of the administrative data provided by  Member States. Application of the Common Integrated  Risk Analysis Model (CIRAM) A key development in the CIRAM 2.0 update released in 2011 was the adoption of a  management approach to risk analysis that  defines risk as a function of the threat, vulnerability and impact. Such an approach endeavours to reflect the spirit of the Schengen  Borders Code and the Frontex Regulation,  both of which emphasise risk analysis as a  key tool in ensuring the optimal allocation of  resources within the constraints of budget,  staff and efficiency of equipment. Passenger flow across the  external borders Passenger flow is highly correlated with the  volumes of checks that border guards have  to perform at the BCPs. The composition and  volume of passenger flow determine to a  large extent the planning and allocation of  resources that will be needed. At a European level, there is no systematic  reporting on passenger flows by BCP, border section or as a total for the EU’s external  border. Some external indicators can be used  to raise awareness on the trend, like growth  in air traffic movements, tickets sold by ferry  companies, and the like. However, these external indicators are insufficient to properly  and rapidly highlight the trend. Despite these  shortcomings, some initiatives are being developed, such as the Smart Borders Package  currently in the pilot phase. Hopefully, this  may lead to the roll-out of an EU Entry/Exit  System that will remedy this lack of reliable  data. In parallel, Frontex and Member States,  under the Frontex Risk Analysis Network  (FRAN), have started to report passenger  flow on a monthly basis. This initiative is still  in its infancy, and the data collection is done  on a voluntary basis (13 Member States did  not report any monthly data for 2014). Nevertheless, this reporting should shed some  light on the broad characteristics of passenger flows across the external borders. At the macro level, since 2008 two factors have  contributed to significant changes in passenger flow: the first one was the economic crisis  that translated into a decrease in passenger  flow in 2009–2010, in particular at the air borSituational picture in 2014 In addition, Spain reported refusals of entry in Ceuta and Melilla, which totalled: 492742 in 2008; 374845 in 2009; 280625 in 2010; and 215021 in  2011. Decisions not available for France, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Sweden. For 2014, data from Austria are not available. Data for France are not available for 2011 and 2012. Figures provided by Member States to the European Commission in the framework of the EU External Borders Fund. der. The second was the visa liberalisation policy and local border traffic agreements that  resulted in higher passenger flows, mostly at  the land borders with Western Balkan countries, especially at the Hungarian land border  with Serbia, i.e. along the main road connection of the Western Balkans to the EU. Even  though the lack of passenger flow data does  not warrant the comparison of flows at the  land and air borders, since 2010, refusals of entry have been larger at the land borders than  at the air borders, which suggests a heavier  workload at the former type of border. Air borders At the air borders, Member State border-control authorities do not collect data on passengers going through border checks in a  systematic way. Some Member States have  national Entry-Exit systems in place that record the number and nationality of the passengers in detail, but most Member States  do not directly collect detailed statistics but  rely on information provided by air carriers  (flight manifests and/or API transmissions).  At the air border, data from Eurostat on extra-EU arrivals are the best approximation of  the flow of passengers, but this flow does not  correspond to the total flow of passengers  going through border checks as it does not  take into account the flow between Schengen and non-Schengen Member States. Eurostat annual totals for 2014 are not yet  available but earlier data can also provide  some valuable insights (see Fig. 1). In 2013  compared to 2012 the increase in arrivals  requiring border checks (arrivals from third  countries, as well as between Schengen and  non-Schengen Member States and between  non-Schengen Member States) was more  pronounced (+20%) than in the case of arrivals not requiring any checks (+9%, within  Schengen Member States). This means that  border-control authorities saw their workload at airports considerably increasing in  2013. The rising trend in passenger flow is  on major air routes. Third-country airports of departure to  the EU The USA remains the main departure third  country for arrivals in the EU, representing 19% of all arrivals from third countries  in 2013 (with about 27 million passengers),  yet the largest increase was observed for  arrivals from Turkey: from about 16 million in 2012 to nearly 20 million in 2013  (+25%). In fact, two Turkish airports, Istanbul (more than 7 million arrivals) and the  leisure airport Antalya (6.5million arrivals),  are in the top three airports for arrivals in  the EU. The largest absolute increase between 2012 and 2013 was reported for arrivals from Dubai airport, which increased  from 5.6 million in 2012 to nearly 7 million  in 2013 (+25%). Arrivals from the Russian Federation (mostly  from Moscow Sheremetyevo airport) have  also constantly increased since 2009, to reach  a record high in 2013 with 11 million arrivals,  but this trend is expected to stop in 2014, because of the economic downturn in the Russian Federation and the depreciation of the  rouble against the euro which have a negative  impact on numbers of travellers to the EU. Land borders Information available on passenger traffic at  the external land borders of the EU is scarce.  Under FRAN data collection scheme on passenger flow, ten Member States reported  data on passenger flow at their land border on a monthly basis in 2014. Information  for some of the busiest land borders is still  missing, notably at the Bulgarian and Greek  land border with Turkey, and at the Croatian  border with Bosnia-Herzegovina and Serbia. In 2014, the ten Member States reporting  data on passenger flow together totalled  about 50 million arrivals at the land borders. The traffic was the heaviest at the  borders with the Russian Federation (Norway, Finland, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania),  with about 13million passengers. On an annual basis, passenger flow from Ukraine followed. However, through the year, these two  flows showed diverging trends, with passenger flow from the Russian Federation decreasing and passenger flow from Ukraine  slightly increasing. Indeed, passenger flow sharply dropped at  all border sections with the Russian Federation after August 2014, as a consequence of  the economic downturn in the Russian Federation and the depreciation of the rouble  against the euro. This makes any purchase  in the EU much less accessible for Russian  customers. On the other hand, this situation is likely to favour the growth of petty  smuggling across the border. Indeed, wider  price difference in the rouble for products  like cigarettes will make it more attractive for Russian smugglers to export illegally to the EU. In terms of nationalities, Ukrainians were  ranking first for passenger flow. The largest  Arrivals requiring and not requiring border checks at EU  airports in 2009–2013 increase was, however, reported for Moldovans after the introduction of visa liberalisation regime that entered into force in 2014. Land BCP check practices and land BCPs  themselves vary widely. This sets them apart  from air borders, as airports constitute a  controlled environment where practices can  be more easily standardised. Moreover, the  rate at which traffic flows across land BCPs  are determined not only by Member States  but also by the practices of neighbouring  third countries. Bilateral cooperation is thus  fundamental to facilitating transit. Unlike at  the air border, early warnings at land BCPs  are rarely available, which limits the ability of border management authorities to  allocate resources in advance. Finally, land  borders can be subject to massive or emergency flows, for which contingency planning is necessary. Visas The Community Code on Visas, which entered into force in April 2010, sets out the  common requirements for issuing transit  and short-term visas to enter the territory of Member States. There are currently  over 100 nationalities that require a visa to  enter the EU, covering more than 80% of  non-EU population of the world. Nevertheless, about 1 billion nationals from approximately 40 third countries do not require an  EU visa. These include Australia, Canada,  Japan, New Zealand and the USA. As indicated in the Visa Code, statistical data are  an important means of monitoring migratory movements and can serve as an efficient management tool. Generally, a short-stay visa issued by one of  the Schengen states (visa C) entitles its holder  to travel throughout the 26 Schengen states  for up to three months within a six-month  period. Visas for visits exceeding that period remain subject to national procedures.  The data include visas issued by the Schengen Associated Countries (Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway and Switzerland), but do  not include those issued by Croatia, Cyprus,  Romania and Bulgaria, which have not yet  joined the Schengen area, nor visas issued  by the UK and Ireland, which are not part of  the Schengen area. Data on visa issuance by Member States and  third countries of issuance are not yet available for 2014, but the European Commission,  through its Directorate-General Home Affairs, has released the data for 2013. VIS data  are collected on the basis of the place of application rather than the citizenship of the  visa applicant. Thus, for instance, applications made in the Russian Federation do not  necessarily represent only Russian nationals.  However, for the purpose of the following  overview, the country where the visas were  delivered was used as the most suitable approximation of the visas issued to citizens of  that country. Visas broken down by nationalities are available at the national level, where  they can be used for operational purposes. In 2013, a total of 16196350 short-term uniform visas were issued, representing an increase of 14% compared to 2012. Most of the  visas (61%) were issued in just three countries: the Russian Federation, which alone  accounted for 43% of all visas issued in 2013,  with almost 7 million visas, as well as Ukraine  (1.5 million, 9%) and China (1.4 million, 9%).  There are, however, important differences  between these three countries in the purpose of travel and frequency of trips. Multiple-entry visas accounted for 49% of all visas  issued in the Russian Federation, but only for  13% of those issued in China. Indeed, many  Chinese applied for short-term visas as part  of their tourist package in the EU. According  to the World Tourism Organization, China is  now the leading nation in terms of tourism  expenditure worldwide, and this trend will  further consolidate. Detections of illegal border-crossing between BCPs  Detections reported by routes and top three nationalities at the external borders In 2013, the Schengen Member State reporting the issuance of most short-term visas was  France (2.3 million worldwide). For the first  time, Italy (1.9 million) and Spain (1.89 million)  issued more visas than Germany (1.85 million). The granting of visa-free regime to Moldova  in 2014 considerably increased passenger  flows, but in contrast to the situation in the  Western Balkans did not result in an increase  in asylum applications. Detections of illegal  border-crossing between  BCPs In 2014, detections of illegal border-crossing reached a new record, with more than  280000 detections. This was twice as many  as the previous record of 140000 detections  in 2011, the year of the Arab Spring. This unprecedented number of migrants crossing illegally the external border has roots in the  fighting in Syria that have created the worst  refugee crisis since the Second World War. Indeed, most of the detections at the borders  concern migrants from Syria, who later applied for asylum within the EU. The unprecedented number of migrants detected at the external border of the EU had  several implications for border-control authorities and EU internal security: Most of these detections were reported as  part of search and rescue operations in the  Central Mediterranean area. In 2014, border-control authorities saved the lives of  thousands of people. Not all could be saved  unfortunately, as facilitators have increasingly chartered unsafe boats, stretching  to the limit the capacities of surveillance  and rescue. The very high demand for crossing to the  EU has also created new modus operandi.  Since September, there has been an increasing use of large cargo ships to transport migrants directly from the Turkish  coast near Syria to Italy. This is a multi-million-euro business for OCG, which is likely  to be replicated in other departure countries. Another worrying trend has been the  increasing deliberate attempts to involve  merchant ships to rescue migrants. This  has prompted the International Maritime  Organization (IMO) to voice concerns over  the involvement of the shipping industry  in rescuing irregular migrants. With a record level of migrants crossing  the border illegally, resources are devoted  to their immediate care, but not towards  screening and obtaining information on  basic characteristics like their nationality.  As migrants quickly continue their journey to other Member States, increasing  the movements of persons staying illegally within the EU, this puts the EU internal security at risk. Similarly to last year, most of detected migrants were adult men (see Fig. 2). However,  the proportion of women and children reflects the fact that most migrants are seeking asylum in the EU, escaping violence in  their own country. Indeed, Syrians alone (79 169) represented  more than a quarter (28%) of the total as  shown in Figure 3. They were also the top  nationality for other indicators, in particular asylum applications, reflecting the dire  situation in Syria and the desperate plight  of Syrian asylum seekers. However, the vast  majority of Syrians did not apply for asylum  in the Member States of entry but rather in  other Member States for many different reasons, notably because they expect to receive  more attractive welfare benefits.  Regarding Eritreans, their detections in 2014  reached a record level (more than 34500,  compared to 11300 in 2013). They were mostly  arriving through Libya on the Central Mediterranean route. Like Syrians, they did not  apply for asylum in the Member States of entry, but rather continued to other Member  States. Many of the Eritreans stated that they  had lived for some time in Libya but decided  to leave because of the violence. Detections of Afghans sharply increased from  about 9500 in 2013 to more than 22000 in  2014. Afghans were detected on the Eastern  Mediterranean route (mostly crossing the  Eastern Aegean Sea), and then once again  on the Western Balkan route. Detections of citizens from Kosovo* crossing the land border illegally between Serbia  and Hungary sharply increased in November  and December 2014. This trend coincided  with rumours among Kosovo*’s population  that it would be now easier to obtain asylum in the EU. By the end of the year their  detections totalled 22 069. Routes Central Mediterranean route In 2014, more than 170000 migrants arrived irregularly in the EU through the Central Mediterranean route (see Fig. 4). As in  2013 and in 2011, the Central Mediterranean  route was the main area for illegal bordercrossing into the EU, representing 60% of  all detections in 2014. Detections were the  largest between June and September at over  20000 per month, but throughout the year,  monthly detections were larger than in 2013.  Most migrants were Syrians and Eritreans departing from the Libyan coast. The vast majority were rescued by bordercontrol authorities after issuing a distress  call; however, despite best efforts there were  many fatalities. Smugglers typically make  use of frail, overcrowded boats, with limited  fuel available to maximise their profits, putting migrants’ lives at considerable risk. The  role of the Italian Navy and the JO Hermes/ Triton was crucial in rescuing an unprecedented number of migrants. Despite these  efforts, around 3400 people died or went  missing at sea in 2014 and around 2800  since the beginning of July according to UNHCR estimates. Besides naval assets, civilian vessels have  been increasingly involved in the detection  and rescue of migrants at sea (see Fig. 5). According to the International Maritime Organization (IMO), more than 600 merchant ships  have been diverted from their routes to rescue persons at sea in 2014. These deviations  are, in the words of the Secretary General,  detrimental to shipping and are not offset  by any realistic prospects of salvage awards. In addition to migrants leaving from Libya,  since September 2014, an increasing number  of cases have been reported of cargo vessels  being used to smuggle migrants from Turkey directly to Italy. This new trend affects  the Eastern Mediterranean route, as the departure area, and the Central Mediterranean  area, as the arrival area. This practice is further developed under the section related to  the Eastern Mediterranean route. As migrants were rescued in high-sea, they  were reported as part of the Central Mediterranean route. Many were disembarked in  Apulia and Calabria, to alleviate the burden on  reception capacity in Sicily. From a statistical  point of view, these disembarkations artificially inflated the number of migrants usually  reported on the Apulia and Calabria route. In  2014, there were fewer migrants departing  from Egypt and targeting this area of the Italian coast than in 2013. Nationalities Once rescued, migrants declare their nationality and this information is used to determine the main countries of origin. Since June  2014, due to the large number of migrants  arriving, this information has been either  slowly or partially reported under the heading ‘sub-Saharan’ for many migrants coming  from Africa (26340, or 15% of arrivals in the  Central Mediterranean in 2014). Migrants’  declarations of nationality are also increasingly difficult to validate, as they often lack  travel documents and, with border-control  authorities working under increasing pressure there are fewer possibilities to check  their validity.  Among the migrants who declared their  nationalities, Syrians (nearly 40000) and  Eritreans (more than 33500) were by far  the largest group, together accounting for  more than 43% of all arrivals in the Central  Mediterranean. Eastern Mediterranean route Since data collection began in early 2008,  the Eastern Mediterranean has maintained  its status as a hotspot of irregular migration (see Fig. 6). In 2014, 50800 detections  were reported from the area, representing  18% of the EU total. This was twice as many  as in 2013, mostly due to a sharp increase in  detections in the Aegean Sea (from 11829 in  2013 to 43377 in 2014). Detections remained  comparatively much lower at the Bulgarian  and Greek land borders with Turkey (12262 in  2013 and 5938 in 2014). Sea border Aegean Sea Compared to the previous year, the sharp increase in the Aegean Sea in 2014 meant that  migrants departed from more areas, and also  arrived on a larger number of islands. While  the islands reporting the largest number of  arrivals remained Lesbos, Chios and Samos,  detections were also reported from small islands from North to South, stretching capacity of surveillance. Many migrants claimed  to be Syrian, and were thus handed an administrative notice allowing them to stay in  Greece for up to six months, even without  applying for asylum. Screening processes of some migrants revealed a high degree of falsely claimed nationalities to avoid return. Not knowing the  nationality of migrants who are illegally  crossing the border and travelling within  the EU is evidently a vulnerability for EU internal security. The presence of the screening teams also has  a preventive effect. Migrants aware of being  screened tend to state their true nationality.  This could be indirectly established when comparing the proportion of migrants reporting to  be Syrians in islands where screening teams  were active, with their proportion in islands  where no screening teams were present. In  2014, out of the total of 18662 migrants arriving in Lesbos and Samos, two islands with  screening teams, 36% declared to be Syrians. By  contrast, over the same period, out of 14802  migrants reported in the islands of Kalymnos,  Kos, Leros, Limnos, Patmos, Rhodes and Symi,  seven islands without screening teams, 86%  declared being from Syria. Increasing use of cargo ships Since August 2014 the number of irregular migrants arriving in the Central Mediterranean  from Turkey sharply increased compared to  earlier in the year and to the same period in  2013. This sharp increase was directly related  to the use of cargo ships to facilitate migrants  and asylum seekers from Turkey to Italy (for  example, see Fig. 7). To date, Mersin has been the place where those  wishing to travel to the EU in an irregular fashion have made contact with the smuggling  networks. Wooden boats, however, have departed from various points along south-eastern Turkish coast such as Mersin, Adana and  Hatay provinces to reach cargo vessels waiting off shore. Smuggling migrants from Turkey on board  large cargo vessels is extremely profitable, and such funds are likely to be an important source of income for smuggling  networks also engaged in other criminal  activities. This means that the criminal  networks might be financing other criminal activities by exploiting and putting at  risk vulnerable groups of displaced families from Syria. Specifically, the cargo ships, which are often bought as scrap, tend to cost between  EUR150000 and 400000. There are often  as many as 200–800 migrants on board, each  paying EUR 4500–6000 for the trip, either  in cash a few days before the departure or  by Hawala payment after reaching the Italian coast. The cost is high because the modus  operandi is viewed as being safe and has been  demonstrated as being successful. Hence, the gross income for a single journey  can be as high as EUR 2.5 or even 4 million  depending on the size of the vessel and the  number of migrants on board. In some cases,  the profit is likely to be between EUR1.5 and 3  million once other overheads such as recruiters, safe houses, shuttle vessels, crew and fuel  have been taken into account. Given this level  of financial gain it is important to act against  this modus operandi not only to stem the flow  of irregular migration but also to limit the financial assets of the smuggling networks. Land border Compared to detection at the sea borders,  detections at the Bulgarian and Greek land  border with Turkey have been much lower,  totalling less than 6000 detections. In Bulgaria, as a consequence of increased Bulgarian operational measures, including an Integrated Border Surveillance System (IBSS) and  a special police operation, the level of detections decreased compared to 2013 and tended  to be mostly reported from the eastern part  of the border, not covered by the IBSS. In Greece, while detections at the green border  and at BCPs were low, some migrants were  reportedly hiding in vehicles detected on the  highways inside Greece. Similarly, some interviews with migrants conducted in Italy indicated that they had entered illegally without  being detected at the border. While the reliability of these interviews is difficult to ascertain, they point to the fact that a certain  proportion of migrants who entered illegally  went undetected. Western Balkan route For the second year in a row, detections in  the Western Balkans strongly increased, from  6391 in 2012, to 19951 in 2013 and 43357 in  2014. The Western Balkan route remained largely  a function of the transiting flow of migrants  that enter the EU at the Greek-Turkish borders and later continue towards other Member States through the former Yugoslav  Republic of Macedonia and Serbia. This is  reflected in the large number of detections  of Afghans and Syrians at the Hungarian land  border, whose number increased five-fold  compared to 2013, like they increased in the  Aegean Sea. However, nearly half the detections were citizens of Kosovo*, representing a distinct flow  of migrants in the Western Balkans. Their  detections surged from less than 1000 per  month before September 2014, to more than  9000 in December. This ten times increase  in a few months is one of the sharpest recorded in the FRAN data, comparable to pace  of the increase in the Central Mediterranean  that peaked in the summer. This trend could  partly be attributed to rumours among the  Kosovo* population that after France decided  to remove Kosovo* from the national list of  safe countries it will be much easier to obtain asylum in that Member State. During 2014 most detected individuals immediately applied for asylum. As a result asylum applications in Hungary mirrored the  increase in pressure at this border section,  increasing to unprecedented levels for this  country – more than 43000 applications  submitted in 2014, about half being submitted by Kosovo* citizens. These migrants were  only attempting to cross the green border  into Hungary, rather than attempting to enter via the BCPs, as there is no indication of  increased refusals of entry or use of fraudulent documents at any of the BCPs between  Hungary and Serbia. Despite the apparently tight relationship between illegal border-crossing and applications  for asylum, it is not supposed that all migrants  crossing this border section immediately applied for asylum in Hungary, as asylum applications submitted by citizens of Kosovo* also  increased in Germany over the same period.  This means that, for most migrants, Hungary  is not their final destination and they will continue their journey through the Schengen area.  It also means that, to avoid later return to Hungary, migrants will increasingly attempt to  avoid detection at the border, and only apply  for asylum in Hungary as a last resort option  if detected by border-control authorities. Circular route between Albania and  Greece In 2014, Greece reported 8841 detections  of illegal border-crossing at its land border  with Albania and with the former Yugoslav  Republic of Macedonia, of which 8757 were  associated with Albanians. This represented  a stable trend compared to the previous year.  Prior to visa liberalisation in 2011, detections  at this border section had ranged between  38000 and 30000 a year. The introduction of visa liberalisation went  together with a small increase in refusals of  entry as more Albanians crossed the border  at BCPs. However, in 2014 refusals of entry  decreased at this land border compared to  2013, probably due to the decreasing flow of  seasonal workers to Greece. Indeed, many  Albanians are attempting to travel to other  Member States than Greece, as reflected in  their increasing refusals of entry, notably due  to document fraud, in several Member States.  These trends may reflect a general migration  trend for Albanians within the EU. Western Mediterranean route In 2014 there were 7842 detections of illegal border-crossing in the Western Mediterranean region, which consists of several  areas of the southern Spanish coast and the  land borders of Ceuta and Melilla. This total  shows an increase of 15% compared to the  total of 6838 reported in 2013. Like in 2013, the first half of 2014 showed most  detections being reported at the land border,  mostly from Melilla. Indeed, the Spanish authorities reported several violent attempts to  cross the fence.  As mitigating measures, the fence has been  upgraded. As a result, in the second half of  the year, Spain reported more detections at  the sea border than at the land border. Once in Melilla, migrants are turned over to  Spanish Police Headquarters for identification, and many are transferred to the Temporary Centre for Immigrants (CETI – Centro  de Estancia Temporal de Inmigrantes). However, this centre only has a limited capacity  and some migrants had to be transferred to  mainland Spain. In terms of nationality, most of the migrants  are from Western Africa, in particular from  Cameroon and Mali. Algerians and Moroccans  have also been reported among the top ten  nationalities, but mostly at the sea border. Since November 2014, Spain also reported  an increase in detections of illegal bordercrossing of Syrians at the land border (more  than 250 in November and December), then  applying for asylum. This increase, combining with increasing detections of Syrians using forged document to enter to the EU, has  prompted Spain to open asylum and international protection offices at the borders of  Ceuta and Melilla in March 2015. Black Sea route Detections of illegal border-crossing on the  Black Sea were extremely rare. However,  since 2013, Bulgaria and Romania have reported an increasing number of detections,  totalling 433 migrants in 2014. These incidents still constitute isolated cases,  and are possibly linked to the increased surveillance on the Eastern Mediterranean route  and the increasing number of migrants waiting in Turkey to reach the EU illegally.  Eastern land border route The eastern land border route is, in effect,  an amalgam of detections of illegal bordercrossing reported by Finland, Estonia, Latvia,  Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia, Hungary and Romania. Despite the total length of all the border sections, detections on this route tend to  be lower than on other routes, possibly due to  the long distances between major hubs and  many countries of origin. Also, according to  several reports shared during 2014, visa fraud  and counterfeit border-crossing stamps tend  to predominate on this route, as opposed to  detections of illegal border-crossing. Detections of illegal border-crossing remained  stable, with 1275 detections (compared to  1316 in 2013). In 2014, most detections were  reported at the land border between Lithuania and Belarus. Most of these detections  were of Vietnamese nationals arriving after  transiting through Belarus. By contrast to other routes, a large proportions of these detections were connected  with the smuggling of goods rather than irregular migration. Several Member States  also mentioned migrants or smugglers crossing the border illegally undetected, but these  events are believed to be rare. Detections of illegal border-crossing are also  kept at low levels along the eastern land  border thanks to the surveillance efforts of  neighbouring third countries, in particular  the Russian Federation and Belarus. Most  part of the border with Belarus is fenced on  the Belarusian side. Regarding the border with Ukraine, Frontex  monitors the situation, but in 2014 no important changes have been noticed. Detections  for illegal border-crossing remains insignificant along all green border section with  Ukraine and the number of refusals of entry remained comparable to previous years. Clandestine entries Detections of clandestine entry in vehicles  increased strongly from 599 in 2013 to 3052  in 2014. The increase was due to a tenfold  increase in detections reported from the  Bulgarian BCPs along the land border with  Turkey. The increase started in August, possibly as an indirect consequence of enhanced  measures at the green border that might have  caused a partial displacement of the flow  from green border to BCPs, by way of clandestine entries. At the neighbouring Greek  border section, BCP Kipi, data on clandestine entries is not collected on a systematic  basis, but detections were much lower than  at the Bulgarian border (see Fig. 8). Clandestine hiding in vehicles was also reported in large numbers by Croatia and Hungary at BCPs along their land borders with  Serbia, as well as on exit from Bulgaria to Serbia in transit to Hungary. The migrants For  Croatia, 2014 was the first complete year of  reporting, so comparison with previous year  are not relevant. However, in Hungary, detections doubled compared to last year, in  line with increasing pressure at the green  border. This means that the Hungarian authorities are facing considerable challenges,  having to deal with larger passenger flow in  the wake of visa liberalisation in the Western  Balkans, increased detections of illegal border-crossing and clandestine entries. Spain reported 340 clandestine entries in  2014, at the BCP with Morocco in Melilla. This  was the first annual report, so comparison  with previous years is not possible. Clandestine entry requires migrants to stay  in confinement for long periods of time, and  is known to put migrants’ lives at risk of suffocation and dehydration. Therefore, most  of the migrants detected hiding in vehicles  at BCPs are single young males, rather than  more vulnerable family groups. Compared to detections of illegal bordercrossings (283500), the number of detected  attempts at clandestine entry (3052) appears  very low, in particular considering the large  volume of vehicle traffic, particularly lorries.  It is thus reasonable to assume that detections underestimate the actual number of  clandestine entries. Document fraud In 2014 there were just over 9400 detections of document fraud cases on entry to  the EU/Schengen area from third countries,  which represents a slight decrease compared  to last year. The introduction of the new security features  into travel documents and the development  of the new automated border-control systems did not translate into a significant decrease in the use of fraudulent documents.  Fraudsters appear to have changed their modi  operandi and instead of the simple alterations,  tend to use more sophisticated methods. Routes The air borders remained the border type reporting the largest number of detections of  document fraud in 2014, but on a decreasing  trend compared to 2013 (-10%). Considering all detections of fraudulent documents at the air borders in 2014, Istanbul  Atatürk (IST) international airport in Turkey  remained the most reported last embarkation  airport from third countries, even if the overall number of document fraud cases dropped  down by almost 40% compared to 2013. Murtala Muhammed (LOS) international airport in Lagos, Nigeria remained the second  most common embarkation point of detected  document fraudsters. In fact document fraud  detections on flights to EU/Schengen countries increased by almost 20%. The majority of document fraudsters were Nigerians. Other often reported last embarkation airports were located in Brazil, most notably  Rio de Janeiro (GIG) and Fortaleza (FOR).  Document fraud from these airports significantly increased. For one-third of all detections made at the  air borders on entry to the EU/Schengen area  and involving passengers arriving from third  countries the last embarkation airport was  unknown (meaning not reported under the  EDF data collection). Detections of document fraud at the land  border increased by 16% between 2013 and  2014, but remained significantly  smaller than  at the air borders (see Fig. 10). The increase at  the land border was driven mainly by a significant rise in document fraud detections  at the Spanish-Moroccan land border section, involving almost exclusively Syrian and  Moroccan nationals. The detections of Syrians using fraudulent documents to enter the  EU by land border section between Morocco  and Spain appeared for the first time in 2014. Detections of document fraud also increased  significantly at the land border between Bulgaria and Turkey (by 30% compared to 2013)  mostly due to a larger number of detected  Iraqi nationals. Detections also increased  (+20%) at the land border between Hungary  and Serbia, with mostly Serbian, Albanian  and Kosovo* citizens detected using fraudulent documents at this land border section. At the sea borders, fewer cases were reported. Almost half of the cases were connected to Moroccan nationals detected in  Ceuta (Spain). commonly detected document fraudsters  across the EU/Schengen area in 2014. Nigerians continued to rank high for detections of document fraud, with more than  500 fraudulent cases in 2014. Most detections were made after embarkation in Lagos.  The number of Iraqi nationals involved in document fraud more than doubled compared  to 2013. They were mostly detected flying  from Fortaleza (Brazil) and Istanbul (Turkey).  Claimed EU nationals detected with fraudulent documents rose by almost 20% from 945  fraudulent cases in 2013 to 1140 fraudulent  cases in 2014 including all travel types. Most  detections were made on intra-EU/Schengen movements, often starting on Greek islands but the largest increase, by almost 50%  compared to 2013, was recorded on entry to  the EU/Schengen area from third countries. Travel documents Fraudulent passports were mostly detected  on entry from third countries (4953) followed  by visas (1616), residence permits (1506), ID  cards (1414), stamps (1047) and other documents (233). The overall decrease compared  to 2013 was led mainly by the decrease in detections of fraudulent border stamps followed  by residence permits and visas. The biggest  increase was recorded in case of fraudulent  ID cards. Most of the fraudulent documents  detected on intra-EU/Schengen movements  were ID cards (5067) (+30% compared to  2013). Regarding impostors, most were using authentic EU passports. Refusals of entry Member States reported a total of more than  114000 refusals of entry at the external borders of the EU, a decrease of 11% compared to  last year. The decrease is the consequence of  the record high in 2013 when an exceptionally  Nationalities As in 2013, Syrians accounted for the largest share of detections of fraudulent document on entry to EU/Schengen countries,  increasing from 1200 detections in 2013 to  over 1400 detections in 2014 (see Fig. 11). In  addition, more than 2200 detections, representing a 70% increase compared to 2013  were also detected on intra-EU/Schengen  movements, making Syrians by far the most  large number of Russians of Chechen origin  were refused entry due to a lack of visa and  then applied for asylum in Poland and Germany before overstaying in the EU. This modus  operandi became less popular in 2014 thanks  to successful media campaigns supported by  Germany aimed at quelling the widespread  rumours in Chechnya that it was possible to  enter Member States without a visa and easily receive asylum once there. As shown in Figure 12, since 2011, more refusals  of entry were issued at the land border (56%)  than at the air borders (40%). This is due to  the increase in passenger flow at land borders following visa liberalisation in the Western Balkans, and the subsequent increased  role of border-control authorities in checking  entry requirements, which was previously the  responsibility of consular authorities who issued the visa. At the same time, at the air border most refusals of entry used to be issued to  citizens of Latin America. However, since this  region has been enjoying economic growth  and better employment rate since 2010, there  has been a decrease in the number of passengers refused entry at the EU’s external border. Indeed, since 2009 (with the exception of 2013  when Russians of Chechen origins ranked  first), most of the persons refused entry at  EU borders were Ukrainians. Albanians have  been ranking high since 2011, in the wake of  the visa liberalisation. In particular, Albanians are now ranking first for refusals of entry at the air border. Altogether, citizens of  Western Balkan countries granted visa-free  regime accounted for 25% of all refusals of entry at the external border, or 28140 persons. As in previous years, the main reasons for refusals of entry were the lack of a valid visa  (30%) and the lack of appropriate documentation justifying the purpose of stay (21%).  The number of persons refused entry due  to an alert in the SIS represented only 2% of  the total, with 2753 refusals issued in 2014. Detections of illegal stay In 2014, there were 441780 detections of illegal stay in the EU, which represents a generally increasing trend compared to the year  before and recent reporting periods. However, in the following analysis of detections  of illegal stay it has to be borne in mind that  the Netherlands, since 2012, due to technical  reasons, reported only detections on exit and  not those inland, which in 2011 amounted to  about 6000. Also in Sweden, for administrative reasons, many asylum applicants were  also reported as illegal stayers, raising the  total number of detections of illegal stay in  Sweden. Finally, data from Croatia cover the  whole of 2014, whereas the 2013 data only refer to the period between July and December  2013, after the country joined the EU. The vast majority of illegal stayers were detected inland (383507 detections, or 86% of  the total) and so are presumed to be long  term over stayers as they were making no  attempt to leave at the time of detection.  The next most common location for detections of illegal stayers was the air borders  on exit (33789 detections) followed by the  land borders (15345 detections) where illegally staying migrants were leaving the EU  or the Schengen area. In terms of nationalities, the large number of  Syrians detected staying illegally is artificially  inflated by detections in Sweden and some  other Member States as it includes people  not meeting requirements for staying legally  before they apply for asylum. Looking at detections over the past few years,  Moroccans stand out as one the main nationalities detected staying illegally (above  20000 annual detections between 2009  and 2014), although their detections at the  external borders remain much lower. This indicates that Moroccans tend to cross the external borders legally, but then exceed their  legal period of stay within the EU. The same  applies to Algerians, although in lower number (above 10000 annual detections for ilpared to 2013. The absolute total number of  migrants subject to return decisions is still  underestimated by this indicator, as data on  decisions were unavailable from, inter alia,  France, the Netherlands and Sweden, which  only reported effective returns but presumably issued a high number of decisions. Much of the change between 2013 and 2014  was due to an increase in return decisions issued by Spain, from 7410 in 2013 to 40386 in  2014. This increase in the number of return  decisions did not concern any nationality in  particular, but was spread among all nationalities, suggesting an increased use of return  when detecting migrants illegally. Effective returns In 2014, there was a steady trend of 161309  third-country nationals effectively returned  to countries outside the EU (see Fig. 16). The  UK was the Member State conducting the  largest number of returns, with steady trends  of returned nationals from India and Pakistan.  Greece reported an increase in effective returns, mostly of Albanians. Type of return It is difficult to evaluate the overall cost-effectiveness of return measures in comparison with other practical measures taken to  reduce irregular migration. Forced returns  are recognised as being more costly than  voluntary returns, although Member States  highlight the importance of return flights  (including those co-ordinated by Frontex)  in ensuring an effective return, as well as  having a deterrent effect for future irregular migrants. Within the number of effective returns to  third countries in 2014, 40% were reported  to be on voluntary basis and 43% were forced  returns, while for 17%, the type of return was  not specified (see Fig. 16). legal stay between 2009 and 2014). Afghans  have also ranked high among the top nationalities since 2009. In 2014, there were 252003 third-country nationals subject to an obligation to leave the  EU as a result of an administrative or judicial decision, which was a 12% increase comIn terms of nationalities, there is a striking  difference between the nationality detected  crossing the border illegally or staying illegally  in the EU, and the nationality effectively returned (see Fig. 17). Indeed, most people detected crossing the border illegally apply for  asylum and thus are not returned. Facilitators The facilitation of illegal immigration remains a significant threat to the EU. Detections of facilitators rose from 7252 in 2013  to 10234 in 2014. The increase was mostly  due to increases reported in Spain, Italy  and Bulgaria. The facilitation of irregular migrants by sea  is carried out using increasingly diverse modi  operandi, which often put the lives of migrants  at risk. The Central and Eastern Mediterranean routes are particularly affected by growing and sustained flows of irregular migrants  facilitated to the EU using various types of  vessels. The recent incidents of large cargo  vessels containing several hundreds of migrants is evidence of this evolution. Organised Crime Groups (OCGs) provide facilitation services to an ever-increasing number of irregular migrants seeking to reach the  EU. These OCG activities sustain and exacerbate the large-scale influx of irregular migrants to the EU. Driven by a profit-incentive,  these OCGs callously disregard the safety and  human rights of migrants. Large and increasing numbers of facilitated irregular migrants  enter the EU along Europe’s Mediterranean  coast and engage in secondary movements  to countries of final destination. Irregular migrants are also facilitated to enter the EU by air relying on fraudulent documents. Other modi operandi include marriages  of convenience as well as the abuse of visas/ overstaying. However, it is difficult to quantify the scope of these activities. OCGs provide various facilitation services for  irregular migrants enabling the entry into the  EU, secondary movements within the EU and  the transition to legal stay in Member States.  Most OCGs operate on an international level  relying on contacts in countries of origin and  within diaspora communities in transit and  destination countries. The proportion of facilitated irregular migrants remains difficult  to assess. Facilitation services related to the illegal immigration to the EU and secondary movements between Member States are in high  demand and generate significant profits for  the OCGs involved. People smuggling is a  growing market prompting existing OCGs  and criminals to adapt their business models and shift from other criminal activities to  the facilitation of illegal immigration. Cross-border crimes Frontex promotes and coordinates European  border management with aspecial focus on  migration flows. In application of the concept  of Integrated Border Management, it additionally supports Member States in combating organised crime at the external borders,  including the smuggling of goods and trafficking in human beings. However, due to the legal and institutional national characteristics,  border-control authorities along the external borders of the EU have different types and  degrees of responsibilities in the fight against  transnational crimes. The nature and extent  of inter-agency cooperation at the external  borders thus differs greatly between Member  States. Regarding the prevention of smuggling  of illicit goods, border-control authorities of  certain Member States play only an assisting  role, while border-control authorities in other  Member States share their tasks with customs  or are able to conduct investigations. Because  of these differences, cross-border crime data  reported by some national border guard institutions are partial and frequently do not include data collected by customs. On the other hand, identifying cross-border  movements of persons involved in criminal  activities or victims thereof is acrucial task  of border-control authorities. Either in the  case of human trafficking or the travel of voluntary fighters with a jihadist background,  border agencies are confronted with new  challenges particularly in the field of international and inter-agency cooperation, profiling, identification, and assistance to victims. Smuggling of illicit drugs Cannabis from the Western Balkans and  North Africa The EU is the destination of several main  routes for various narcotic drugs, coming from  different regions of the world including Latin  America, the Western Balkans, West Asia  and North Africa. The EU also plays a role of  a transit point for drugs destined for other  regions. According to the EMCDDA European  Drug Report 2014*, 80% of drug seizures in  Europe were for cannabis in 2012, although  indicators point to a trend of decreasing use. Cannabis is smuggled into Europe in the  form of two distinct products, cannabis resin  (‘hashish’) and herbal cannabis (‘marijuana’).  The main provider of cannabis resin to Europe is Morocco, although its production capacities are in decline. Spain as an entry door  for cannabis resin from Morocco reported  around two thirds of the total quantity of  resin seized in Europe in 2012. Within the last years, the number of seizures  of herbal cannabis have been increasingly  exceeding resin seizures. The shift towards  herbal cannabis was predominantly caused  by an increase of domestic production in  many European countries. This means that  trafficking of cannabis products across the  EU external borders has decreased, with the  domestic production increasingly satisfying  national demand. An exception seems to be  trafficking activities in southeast Europe,  where mainly Albanian cannabis supplies  the customer demand in countries such as  Greece, Italy, Slovenia, and Hungary. Cocaine from South America According to EMCDDA calculations based on  seizure data, cocaine shows to be the third  most intensively smuggled drug in Europe after cannabis resin and herb. In 2012, around  77000 seizures of cocaine amounting to  71 tonnes have been reported by Member  States. The number of seizures increased  between the mid-1990s and 2007, but have  been declining since 2009. Reported quantities in contrast have been slightly increasing  in 2011 and 2012, mostly because of seizures  made in transit countries including Spain and  Belgium. Some of the cocaine seized in the  EU was in fact destined for emerging markets in third countries such as the Russian  Federation. The drug is almost entirely produced in Bolivia, Colombia and Peru, with the latter  having substantially increased its supply to  Europe.** Cocaine is smuggled from South  America to the EU across the Atlantic by  sea and air. Large shipments travelled by sea  and air from Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela to  Spain, Portugal, the Netherlands, and increasingly also Belgium. Cocaine is smuggled by air  freight, on pleasure boats and through container shipments, but to a large extent also  by individual airline travellers. In October 2014, the European Commission  adopted two reports concluding that Colombia and Peru meet the criteria to start negotiating agreements allowing their citizens  visa-free access to the Schengen area. An introduction of short-stay visa waiver agreements for citizens of Colombia and Peru,  however, might allow OCGs to intensify their  use of individual cocaine couriers. Although a majority of shipments of cocaine  continue to enter the EU through Western  Europe, a diversification of trafficking routes  away from the very dominant routes to the  Iberian Peninsula drew alarger share of cocaine to the ports of the Balkans and the  Black Sea. Between 2009 and 2011, four  tonnes of cocaine have been seized in Bulgaria, Greece, Romania and Turkey, accounting for 2% of the overall number of seizures  reported in Europe. Bulgarian and Romanian authorities have moreover reported an  increased role of Nigerian OCGs in the trafficking of cocaine to these countries. Heroin from Afghanistan, Iran and  Pakistan Seizure numbers and statistics on treatment  of drug addicts suggest that heroin use in Europe has been decreasing over the last decade. Five tonnes of heroin were seized in 2012,  which represents only 50% of the amount reported by Member States in 2002.*** Most  of the heroin consumed in the EU is produced  in Afghanistan and, to alesser extent, in Iran  and Pakistan. It is transported along a variety of routes to Europe, including the Balkan  route, which runs through Turkey and the  Balkan countries, the Northern route, which  heads through Central Asia and the Russian  Federation, and increasingly the Southern  route via the Persian Gulf by sea, sometimes  including passages through Africa. In 2014, European border guards deployed  along the Balkan route reported seizures totalling 86.4kg of heroin – more than three  times as much as in 2013. The largest quantities were seized at the BCP Kapitan Andreevo at the Bulgarian-Turkish border and  at departure from the Greek ferry port of  Igoumenitsa. New psychoactive substances New psychoactive substances comprise  awide range of drugs that are in many cases  not yet under control of national or international drug legislation. In 2013, the Early  Warning System of the EMCDDA and Europol  listed atotal of 81 new synthetic substances.  Although new psychoactive substances represent only asmall share of the illicit drugs  market, they are particularly dangerous because limited information about their effects on the human body is available. These  substances often come in the form of more  openly sold ‘Legal Highs’, thereby giving the  false impression of legality and lower consumer exposure to physical and mental health  risks. Most new psychoactive substances or  their precursors arrive in shipments from  China or India. The challenges for law-enforcement authorities at the external borders of the EU lie  within the development of capacities to identify the rapidly developing diversity of new  psychoactive substances. Drug control legislative measures within the EU also need a  more coherent approach to prevent the exploitation of differences and gaps between  national jurisdictions. The sale of new psychoactive substances through the internet and  anonymised networks and the fact that manufacturers, retailers and other parts of the  market chain are located in different countries pose additional challenges. In 2013, the  EMCDDA has identified 651 websites shipping ‘legal highs’ to European consumers.**** 3.10.2. Trafficking in human beings (THB) The detection of persons trafficked for sexual exploitation, forced labour or other purposes represents amajor challenge for border  authorities, as victims themselves are often  not aware of their fate when they arrive in  the transit or destination countries. In 2014, Eurostat presented its second statistical working paper on THB at EU level, including data on the years 2010–2012. It allows  a more long-term comparison with data presented in the first edition of the report, which  starts with numbers of 2008. Within five  years, the number of identified victims, male  and female, registered by police, NGOs and  other agencies in the Member States increased from 3691 in 2008 to 4443 in 2012.*  As Eurostat points out, more reported cases  are not necessarily related to ahigher number of actual victims. The upward tendency  may also be caused by an improved reporting rate of the phenomenon. Data disaggregated by types of exploitation in  2012 show that amajority of 66% of the victims were trafficked for the purpose of sexual  exploitation and 20% for labour exploitation.  14% were trafficked for forced begging, criminal activities, removal of organs and other  purposes. Compared to previous years, the  figures point to a clear trend towards a growing share of victims identified for sexual exploitation (2008: 58%), and fewer for labour  exploitation (14%). Important for border guards at the external  borders is the fact that only a minority of  35% of registered victims came from non-EU  countries in the years 2010–2012 (EU victims  mainly come from Romania and Bulgaria). According to Eurostat, the main third countries  of origin in 2012 were Nigeria, Vietnam as an  emerging origin country, China, Albania, Brazil, Ukraine, Philippines, Sierra Leone, Dominican Republic and Cameroon. Notably, the  number of victims from Asia has increased,  with victims from the Philippines being registered in bigger numbers for the first time,  and Vietnamese victims peaking, mainly for  the purpose of labour exploitation. The reemergence of victims of THB from Albania  in 2012 may be connected to the visa liberalisation for Albania by the end of 2010. On  the other hand, victims from Nigeria were  Smuggling of weapons The effective control of firearms is crucial in  the fight against crime and it is clear that European law-enforcement authorities inland  and at the external borders need to cooperate  across the EU in the fight against trafficking  of firearms. The threat emanating from the  crime is measured not simply by the smuggling of the weapons but of the further crimes  and damage they enable. The terrorist attacks of 7–9 January in France and successive  police operations showed the availability of  military-grade arms including AK-47s rocketpropelled grenade launchers on European  illicit markets. Many of these weapons are  illegally traded from former conflict regions  such as the Western Balkans, where in Bosnia and Herzegovina alone around 800000  weapons are estimated to be in illegal civilian possession. Taking into account increasing passenger flow  and heavier workload of border guards at the  EU external borders, and constantly evolving  and refining modi operandi of weapon smugglers, the risk of seeing this criminal activity  at the EU external borders is increasing. EU  funding and action have been put in place to  complement the work of Member States in  addressing this phenomenon and to improve  their capabilities in preventing these criminal  ambitions and averting illicit weapons entering the EU. Smuggled arms might be employed to facilitate organised crime groups involved in the  trafficking of human beings, facilitation of  illegal immigration, illegal drugs trade and  more. Arms trafficking might also be linked  to such crimes as corruption, falsification of  documents, money laundering and thefts from  not sufficiently secured weapon storages or  ammunition stockpiles outside the EU. Terrorist groups might also seek weapons from  criminal groups to be used in attacks staged  in the EU. Presumably, criminal groups explore already existing smuggling routes used  for other criminal phenomena for smuggling  small arms and light weapons. In case of firearms seizures it is important to  distinguish if the weapon was only trafficked  for criminals’ protection – e.g. smuggling  drugs, stolen vehicles – or if it was intended  to be smuggled to the EU. The differences in  legislation among Member States and between third countries and Member States  create legal loopholes that might be exploited  for the secondary distribution of weapons  within the EU. Lack of firearms deactivation  standards and ease of converting gas, alarm,  signal and pneumatic guns imported legally  to the EU into lethal weapons adds additional  risk. Legal channels of distribution of weapons might also be abused (arms trade, legal  weapon transits and purchases). 3.10.5. Exit of stolen motor vehicles According to Eurostat, the total number of  vehicles including cars, motorcycles, buses,  lorries, construction and agricultural vehicles stolen in the EU has been steadily falling between 1998 and 2010. In 2013, statistical  data published by UNODC counted more  than 750000 vehicles stolen in 29 of the EU  and Schengen Associated Countries, compared to 1.4million in 2005.* Among the reasons for the decline were the advanced  technical protection technologies developed  by the producers and intensified international  law-enforcement cooperation. Only asmall share of the vehicles stolen in  the EU are detected at its external borders,  often in the context of Frontex Joint Operations. In contrast to the overall theft statistics, detections at the borders reported to  Frontex showed adecrease from 519 in 2013  to 487 in 2014. These cases included cars, lorMost car thefts were detected by querying  SIS II, the Interpol and national theft data  with the Vehicle Identification Numbers (VIN)  specified on the engine, frame and major  parts of most motor vehicles. Car thieves applied various modi operandi to cloud the identity of their stolen vehicles at the external  borders. Reports indicated frequent manipulation of the VIN, or departure from the EU  with rental or very recently stolen cars before  authorities are notified of the theft. In other  cases, vehicles were disassembled into parts  to obscure identification or vehicle registration papers were counterfeited. The brand preferences did not change during the last years, as more than 40% of the  private vehicles detected were produced by  Mercedes Benz, Volkswagen and BMW. A  majority of the persons driving the stolen  vehicles on exit from the EU were nationals  of the country which they intended to enter.  For example, 70% of the persons caught with  a stolen vehicle at the borders with Ukraine  Figure 18. A Polish border guard inspecting a vehicle driven by a  Turkish national at the BCP of Korczowa, which was allegedly stolen  in Italy were of Ukrainian nationality, while only 17%  were EU citizens. Smuggling of excise goods Most excise goods smuggled across the  EU external borders are tobacco products.  According to estimates of the European  Commission, the illicit trade in tobacco products costs the EU and its Member States  EUR10billion a year in lost tax revenues. Not  only individual consumers and small scale  smugglers from economically weak border  regions try to make use of existing price differences. Large scale criminal businesses illicitly import cigarettes especially to Western  European markets from as far away as Asia. In 2014, many governments increased the  taxes on excise goods to improve their budget  situation. Between January 2013 and July 2014,  22 Member States increased their excise duties on cigarettes, in average by EUR 0.10 per  pack of cigarettes. Currently, acustomer would pay EUR5 for an  average pack of cigarettes in Finland, whereas  across the Russian border, the same good  would cost him only around EUR1. A new  law would see a 40% increase in the minimum price for cigarettes by 1 April 2015, but  that price hike was already compensated by  the recent loss in value of the Russian rouble against the euro. The negative economic  growth in the Russian Federation is expected  to increase the illicit trade of tobacco products to the EU, by both individual ‘ant-smugglers’ from the border regions and OCGs. On 9 January 2014, the Protocol to Eliminate  Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products, was closed  for signature by the Parties to the WHO  Framework Convention on Tobacco Control. At this time, it was signed by 53 States,  including 15 Member States, and by the EU.  The Protocol will enter into force 90 days after the 40th ratification. To assist in the investigation of illicit cross-border trade in tobacco  products, it requires States to implement a  global tracking and tracing regime through  unique, secure and non-removable identification markings, such as codes or stamps on  cigarette packages. Within the EU, this and  other measures for public health are implemented through the revised Tobacco Products Directive, which entered into force on  19 May 2014 and will apply after a transposition period of two years. Atracking system that assists law-enforcement authorities in determining if cigarettes  were traded illegally was already agreed upon  between the EU and the four largest tobacco manufacturers, which cover 80% of the  world market. Through these agreements the  companies committed themselves to sell to  legitimate clients only. However, smaller companies outside the EU currently still sell large  quantities to third-country markets where  only an insignificant share of these cigarettes  can be absorbed by the local demand. Much  of the rest is then smuggled out to Member  States. In particular seizures of ‘cheap white  brands’ have been showing astrong upward  tendency over the past years. An example is  the Jin Ling cigarette brand produced in Kaliningrad, which grew so popular among western consumers that this brand itself started  to be counterfeited. Asylum applications Data on asylum applications are not related  to law-enforcement activities, but provides  contextual information on movements of persons towards the EU. The analysis of asylum  applications for international protection provides useful information on the push and pull  factors at play in mixed migration flows. It is  also important for border-control authorities  because they are often the first authorities  prospective applicants meet, before being referred to asylum authorities. Border-control  authorities also play a role in the implementation of the Dublin system. As mentioned in  recital 3 of the Eurodac Regulation (and in recital 4 of the recast Eurodac Regulation), for  the purposes of applying the Dublin Regulation, it is necessary to establish the identity  of applicants for asylum and of persons apprehended in connection with the unlawful  crossing of the external borders. Finally, unfounded applications for international protection inevitably delay the examination and subsequent provision of protection  for those third-country nationals with genuine claims. When applications are made after an unsuccessful attempt to illegally enter  the territory (illegal border-crossing, document fraud, refusal of entry, clandestine entry), it overloads border-control authorities  and dilutes allocated resources. In 2014, Frontex has developed its collaboration with EASO, which notably contributed  to the analysis of the data on asylum applications, based on the data they collected  through their newly established network. Approximately 615000 applicants for asylum  (+41% compared to 2013) were registered in  2014, which marked the highest level received  in the EU since EU-level data collection began in 2008. 90% of applicants people applying for the first time in the EU. The main nationalities of applicants were  Syrians (over 120000) and those of Western Balkan countries (>107000 considered  together). After a sudden rise in the number  of applications at the beginning of spring,  Eritrea became the second most common  country of origin of asylum claimants in the  EU and Schengen Associated Countries, with  over 40000 applicants in 2014. Significant  (over 50%) increases were also seen in applications from citizens of Pakistan and Afghanistan. The situation in Ukraine caused a  particularly significant change in relation to  previous years. A total of over 14000 claims  were received in 2014 in the EU – a 14-fold  increase compared to 2013 – but the applications were not limited to countries bordering  Ukraine, but spread across all Member States.  In parallel, many Ukrainians sought alternatives to asylum via family reunification or visas and residence permits for work. Compared to last year, 21 Member States reported more applications for international  protection than in 2013. Among these, three  Member States, all of which are located at the  EU external borders, saw particularly sharp  rises: Italy (+146%), Hungary (+125%) and Bulgaria (+54%). EASO’s new Early warning and Preparedness  System (EPS) data collection, which started in  March 2014, includes the numbers of implicit  withdrawals of asylum applications: this covers cases where a person applies in a Member State and then absconds and is no longer  contactable by the Member State. Many of  such persons later apply again for international protection in another Member State  and may eventually be returned in accordance with the stipulations of the Dublin III  Regulation. From the initial data it appears  that the proportion of asylum applications  that are implicitly withdrawn is particularly  high (above 30% of all applications) in several  States at the EU external land border (Poland,  Latvia, Croatia, Romania, Hungary, Slovakia  and Lithuania). Notwithstanding a more detailed analysis of the links between bordercrossing indicators, asylum applications and  withdrawn applications, this pattern might  indicate potential misuses of the asylum procedure whereby an individual may make an  application for international protection in order to circumvent obligations applicable to  regular border-control. This can also be an issue with those arriving  in an irregular manner by sea. Large numbers  of potential applicants for asylum can lead to  severe difficulties in registration. In summer  of 2014 legal and administrative questions  led to the non-fingerprinting of some asylum-applicants in Eurodac in Italy leading to  the non-application of Dublin for those who  absconded from reception centres in Sicily  and other areas and then travelled north to  lodge asylum claims in other Member States.  Italy resolved this issue by issuing instructions to Questure to take fingerprints of all  arrivals even forcibly, if necessary, after the  correct legal interpretation issue was clarified by the Commission and Member States  in the autumn. Situation in the EU Renewed Internal Security  Strategy The EU Strategic Guidelines for the Justice and  Home Affairs Area were adopted in June 2014  and included a call for the renewal of the EU  Internal Security Strategy (ISS) by mid-2015  as part of the efforts to promote operational  police cooperation and to prevent and combat serious organised crime, including human  trafficking and smuggling, as well as corruption. Furthermore, the Council Conclusions of  December 2014 on a renewed Internal Security Strategy call for an update of the EU IBM  Concept. The European Commission will, on  the basis of opinions given by the European  Parliament and the Council of the EU, present a Communication on the renewed ISS  by spring 2015. The five strategic objectives  which were agreed upon for the initial ISS will  remain as priorities. These objectives are: the  disruption of international criminal networks;  the prevention of terrorism and addressing  radicalisation and recruitment; raising levels of security for citizens and businesses in  cyberspace; strengthening security through  border management; and increasing Europe’s  resilience to crises and disasters. 4.3.  State of play concerning an  EU Passenger Name Record  proposal In February 2011, the Commission presented  a proposal for an EU Passenger Name Record (PNR) Directive. The proposal would  oblige Member States to set up PNR systems  and establish strict data protection safeguards for the processing and collection of  PNR data from flights to and from the EU.  The Commission has declared its commitment to ensuring the proposal, which should  European Commission’s  priorities in 2015 The 2015 European Commission programme  of work was adopted in December 2014 and  set out the main actions the Commission intends to take throughout the coming year.  Included here was the European Agenda on  Migration, the objective of which is to develop a new approach to legal migration to  make the EU an attractive destination for  talents and skills, as well as to improve the  management of migration by intensifying  cooperation with third countries, fostering  burden sharing and solidarity and fighting  against irregular migration and smuggling.  The agenda includes the review of the Blue  Card Directive, the EU-wide work permit for  highly skilled workers. The Commission Communication on the  Work Programme states:  ‘To tackle the growing pressure at our  external borders the Commission is developing a European Agenda on Migration, which will balance a fairer and  responsible approach to legal migration, in order to make the EU an attractive destination for talent and skills, with  firm measures against irregular migration and people trafficking and smuggling. Improving the management of  migration means better linking our migration policy with our external policy,  fostering greater internal and external  cooperation, offering protection to persons in need, based on responsibility and  solidarity and preventing tragic events  such as those recurrently happening in  the Mediterranean.’ include high fundamental rights protection for EU citizens, gets adopted. The European Commission, European Parliament  and the Council are currently in negotiations to this end. New Schengen Evaluation  Mechanism Preparations are ongoing as regards the implementation of the new Schengen evaluation mechanism. In line with Regulation  1053/2013 establishing an evaluation and  monitoring mechanism to verify the application of the Schengen acquis, the standard  evaluation questionnaire was adopted in July  2014. In October, the annual evaluation programme for 2015 was approved on the basis  of the multi-annual evaluation programme  2014–2019, taking into account the risk analysis provided by Frontex as well as information made available by relevant EU agencies  and bodies such as Europol and the Fundamental Rights Agency. The first evaluations  under the new mechanism (concerning announced visits) started in February 2015 in  Austria. In the meantime, a particular focus  has been put on further developing training  for the evaluation experts, including updating the existing training curricula by including  aspects that have not been covered previously, such as return. EUROSUR Handbook The first edition of the EUROSUR Handbook,  as required by Article 21 of the EUROSUR Regulation, was agreed upon by the end of 2014  in meetings between the Member States, the  Commission and Frontex. The Handbook will  provide technical and operational guidelines,  recommendations and best practices, including on cooperation with third countries. The  European Commission shall adopt the Handbook in the form of a recommendation in the  course of 2015. Roll-out and impact of Visa  Information System The Visa Information System (VIS) will be  rolled out, region by region, until all Schengen states’ consulates worldwide are connected. So far, the VIS has started operations  in North Africa in October 2011; in the Near  East in May 2012; in the Gulf region in October 2012; in West and Central Africa in March  2013; in East and Southern Africa in June 2013;  in South America in September 2013; and in  Central and South East Asia and in the occupied Palestinian Territory in November 2013.  The year 2014 saw the introduction of the VIS  in Turkey and the Western Balkans. A new timetable was agreed upon for the final VIS roll outs during 2015. The latest time  frame for the roll-out in regions 17–23 is as  follows: June 2015 for region 17 (Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova, Ukraine); September 2015 for region 18 (the Russian  Federation); October 2015 for region 19 (China, Japan, Mongolia, North Korea, South Korea, Taiwan); November 2015 for region 20 (Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri-Lanka), 21 (Andorra, Holy See,  Monaco, San Marino), 22 (Ireland and the  UK) and 23 (Schengen Member States). Schengen visa policy  developments On 17 March 2014, the European Parliament  endorsed the Agreement between the EU  and the Republic of Azerbaijan on the facilitation of the issuance of visas. Progress reports on Kosovo*, Turkey and  Georgia were published. Whilst the second  progress report regarding Kosovo* notes good  progress, the Commission considered that  further efforts are required to obtain visafree travel for Kosovo* citizens. Turkey’s first  progress report on fulfilment of the visa liberalisation roadmap was presented by the  Commission on 20 October 2014. The Commission’s second progress report on Georgia’s implementation of Visa Liberalisation  Action Plan (VLAP) has concluded that the  first-phase requirements of the visa dialogue  have been met and the second phase where  implementation of benchmarks will be reviewed can therefore be launched. In 2014, an amendment to Regulation  539/2001 was adopted which included additional 17 countries (16 Pacific and Caribbean island nations** and the United Arab  Emirates) to the list of third countries whose  nationals are exempt from the EU visa requirement. However, before this exemption  can come into force the Commission must  negotiate visa waiver agreements with each  of these 17 countries. The processes for the  various countries are currently ongoing and  once negotiations are completed, they will be  submitted for approval to the European Parliament and Council. Following this, and once  the ratification procedures are completed in  both the EU and the concerned third country, the visa waiver agreement will enter into  force for the citizens of those countries, thus  enabling visa-free travel. Negotiations for the  various countries are at differing stages, but  it is hoped that the visa-free travel for these  countries will become a reality at various  points in 2015. It is unlikely that visa-free status for these 17 countries will bring any additional risks in terms of migration and security. In the aforementioned amendment of Regulation 539/2001, Peru and Colombia were also  included in the visa-free list. Following this,  on 29 October 2014 the Commission adopted  two reports concluding that Colombia and  Peru met the criteria to start negotiating  agreements allowing their citizens visa–free  access to the Schengen area. They are now  preparing a recommendation for a mandate  from Council to open negotiations on the  visa waiver. Once granted, the Commission  will begin negotiations with both countries.  Only after the short-stay visa waiver agreements enter into force will visa-free travel  for the citizens of these countries become a  reality. This could happen, at the very earliest, in the second half of 2015. The EU-Ukraine Association Agreement was  signed in late 2014. Among other rules, the  deal provides for greater movement of workers and sets targets for establishing a visafree travel regime and aligning the two sides’  regulatory systems by laying down detailed  timetables for Ukraine to transpose parts of  the EU acquis legislation into its national laws  and put them into effect. As a result of the Statement of the Heads of  State or Government on Ukraine of 6 March  2014 following the violation of Ukrainian  sovereignty and territorial integrity by the  Russian Federation, the visa liberalisation  dialogue with the country was suspended. State of play concerning  the ‘Smart Borders  Package’ (entry/exit  system and the registered  traveller programme) The proposal for a Smart Borders Package  was first examined by the European Parliament and Council in February 2014 and  there they voiced technical, operational and  cost concerns, mainly related to the overall  feasibility of the proposed new systems. To  counter these, the Commission subsequently  initiated the proof of concept exercise which  consisted of two stages. The first stage, consisting of a Commissionled Technical Study aimed at identifying and  assessing the most suitable and promising  options and solutions, was completed by  late 2014. The results of which then fed into  the second stage of the proof of concept: an  eu-LISA run pilot project. This pilot project  which will last for most of 2015 is aimed at  verifying the feasibility of the options identified in the Technical Study and validating the  selected concepts for both automated and  manual border controls. This Pilot will be undertaken at various border crossing points of  volunteering Member States/Schengen Associated Countries. Once the results of this pilot project are published by the end of 2015, legislative deliberations will restart in the European Parliament  and the Council. However, it is not expected  that any eventual system would be in place  at the borders before 2020. Recast Eurodac Regulation The amendment of the Eurodac Regulation  to allow law-enforcement authorities to consult the Eurodac database for the purpose of  prevention, detection or investigation of terrorist offences and of other serious criminal  offences was adopted in 2013. The new rules  will only become applicable though from 20  July 2015. The comparison of fingerprints in  the possession of Member States’ designated  law-enforcement authorities and Europol  against those stored in the Eurodac database  will only be possible where such a comparison is necessary in specific cases, under welldefined circumstances and conditions, and  following prior checks of other databases. Asylum Procedures  Directive changes The recast asylum acquis package brought  about significant changes to the previous  framework. Its updated requirements created a new environment for asylum systems  of participating Member States and will continue to transform them as remaining transposition deadlines approach in July 2015. Of particular relevance are the revisions to  the Dublin system, new rules regarding access  to procedure, as well as a revised framework  concerning border and accelerated procedures, including the situation of vulnerable  applicants and applicants in need of special  procedural guarantees. The revised Dublin Regulation** is already  applicable and it introduces additional guarantees to persons in a Dublin procedure (obligatory personal interview and information  on the procedure for establishing the Member State responsible, extended options for  reunifying family and relatives, and additional  guarantees for minors, including best interest of a child determination and family tracking). The transfer to the Member States  responsible under Dublin can now be appealed and a motion for suspensive effect of  the appeal may be submitted (granting the  right to remain within the territory while the  court is determining the motion for suspension). Legal assistance free of charge is to be  provided upon request and the overall duration of detention is strictly limited. More precise deadlines are introduced for procedures  between States. The Dublin Regulation, in its  revised form, also covers applicants who could  otherwise fall under the Return Directive as  irregular migrants and be returned as such. The revised Eurodac Regulation* improves  data protection standards and sets new time  limits for transmitting fingerprint data to the  central unit of Eurodac. National police services and Europol can access Eurodac data for  the purposes of comparing Eurodac data with  fingerprints linked to criminal investigations  (though only if specific requirements are met,  and only as concerns the most serious crimes  as a last resort after checking other available  databases. There is no possibility to share information with third countries). Article 6 of the recast Asylum Procedures Directive (APD) clarifies the responsibilities of  state authorities in regard to ensuring access  to the asylum procedure for those wishing to  make an application, in particular the necessity for states to register all expressions of  intent to apply made to whichever national  authority is the first point of contact for the  potential applicant. Article 8 stipulates that  training must to be provided to officials who  may come into contact with persons seeking  international protection (in particular during the surveillance of land or maritime borders or during border checks) so that they  are able, inter alia, to provide information on  where and how an application can be lodged. The recast APD also states clearly that persons present in the territorial waters of a  Member State who made an application for  international protection should be disembarked on land and have their applications  examined. Moreover, the conditions and safeguards for applying border and accelerated  procedures have now been clarified and, in  particular, the grounds under which such  procedures can be applied have been made  exhaustive. New rules regarding identification and treatment of vulnerable groups have been put in  place in the recast Reception Conditions Directive (obligation to conduct an individual  assessment to identify the particular reception needs for vulnerable persons and ensure  access to psychological support, legal assistance and information, as well as restrictions  on detaining vulnerable persons, including  minors). Applicants in need of special procedural guarantees, e.g. due to their age, disability, illness, sexual orientation or traumatic  experiences, should be identified in due time  and provided with adequate support such as  sufficient time to make their claims in line  with provisions of the recast APD. In practical terms, those new requirements combined  may substantially limit the use of border and  accelerated procedures with regard to certain groups of applicants. The recast Reception Conditions Directive  also sets forth rules concerning qualifications  required of the representatives of unaccompanied minors. This may be particularly relevant for Member States experiencing high  numbers of unaccompanied minors who abscond after lodging an application, which  may be linked to child trafficking and child  smuggling. Based on the descriptions of the situation in  2014 and a review of the main factors, be it  economic, legal or technical, that can contribute one way or another to irregular migration  to the EU, this chapter reviews the possible  evolution of the situation along the external  border of the EU in the coming years. While  some developments are likely to materialise, others seem possible, based on current  knowledge. Finally, past experiences demonstrate that there are a large number of unforeseeable events and factors that can have  a profound and unpredictable impact on the  situation at the border. Illegal border-crossing  expected to remain  concentrated in southern  and south-eastern borders  of the EU The best forecasts – those likely to materialise and have a direct bearing on the situation  at the external borders – are the continued  use of the Mediterranean area as the main  crossing points for irregular migration. At  the same time, border-control authorities  are expected to be increasingly engaged in  search and rescue operations covering vast  areas of the Mediterranean Sea, as well as  being the first interlocutors for a growing  number of persons presenting themselves  at the EU borders in search of international  protection. Irregular migratory flows are expected to  follow known routes from North Africa and  the Middle East to the EU, mostly by sea and  through the south-eastern land border via  Turkey. The main uncertainties concern the  timing, as well as the size and composition  of the flows. The composition and/or the size  of the flow will vary in response to the developing situation in North Africa and in the  Middle East, particularly in Syria and neighbouring countries. Swift diversification of modi operandi, possible displacement between routes or border  types, and escalating attempts to evade detection or identification are all likely to occur  in response to enhanced surveillance. Based on the location of the main countries  of origin for irregular migration to the EU for  the past five years, the border areas that are  most likely to deal with illegal border-crossing  remain the Southern Mediterranean coast,  and the borders with Turkey. Migrants living  in or having relatively easy/facilitated access  to Turkey and/or North Africa will continue  to be overrepresented in the flow of irregular migrants to the EU. In particular, departures of sub-Saharan migrants from Libya  across the Central Mediterranean to reach Italy and arrivals of Syrians crossing the border  illegally to apply for asylum in the EU – two  phenomena already present in 2013 and 2014  – are likely to continue in the near future. Outlook In addition, the increasing likelihood of family units crossing the border, means that border-control authorities need to be prepared  to manage flow of vulnerable people, including numerous children. This makes it necessary to focus on the further development  of specific mechanisms and procedures to  tackle the needs of this vulnerable group at  the EU external borders, including all air, land  and sea borders. Central Mediterranean area In the Central Mediterranean, many areas on  the North African coasts may be used as departure points for illegal border-crossing to  the EU. North African countries may be used  as transit countries for migrants from more  southern African countries to sail across the  Mediterranean. They may be used as transit  by migrants from many different countries of  origin, which complicate further predictions  in terms of volume. However, with Egypt and  Algeria now requiring visa for Syrian nationals,  these countries are no longer practical transit countries on the way to Libya, the typical departure point in 2014. Turkey has no  such visa requirements for Syrian nationals  and this country may now become the main  country of departure. The increasing complexity of irregular arrivals  are expected to absorb significant resources.  The broadening of the surveillance area along  with increasing trend in boats seeking assistance, result in border assets being increasing mobilised in support of search and rescues  activities. In addition, the profits generated  by the use of old cargo ships for smuggling  migrants may increase their use, including in  the Central Mediterranean. Eastern Mediterranean area On the Eastern Mediterranean route, enhanced surveillance along the land borders  with Turkey has resulted in a displacement  on the Eastern Aegean Sea. This is expected  to put further pressure on the limited local  reception facilities for undocumented migrants. The large number of migrants expected to cross illegally the external borders  will also undermine systematic screening and  debriefing activities. Nationality swapping is  expected to remain an issue. In addition, an increasing number of migrants  from North Africa and the Middle East are expected to transit to Turkey via the air border, before attempting to cross illegally the  border to the EU, also by using forged document. Istanbul airport (IST) is an important  hub for irregular migrants travelling by air to  several Member States, with continuous increase in passenger flows for the past several  years and Turkish Airlines’ expansion strategy  towards Africa and the Middle East. Turkish  airports are thus likely to remain common  embarkation points for irregular migrants  arriving in the EU. As a consequence, the number of migrants  undertaking secondary movements through  the Western Balkans is also expected to rise. Increased workload at the  border Regular passenger flows across the external  border will increase significantly in the coming years due to rising global mobility. Visa  liberalisation processes and local border traffic agreements are placing also increasing responsibilities on border-control authorities. Increasingly, while movements across the  external air borders are managed through a  layered approach, where the border is divided  into four components (in departure countries, at embarking airports, at the border  and after border-crossing), the physical border is increasingly becoming a secondary layer  for risk assessment, meaning that checking  and screening start well before passengers  cross border-control posts at airports. Border  management will increasingly be risk-based,  to ensure that interventions are focused on  high-risk movements of people, while lowrisk movements are facilitated smoothly. Air travel environment is becoming more  complex with the growth of low-cost carriers. In addition, advances in travel complexity and increasing sophistication of criminal  activities result in increasing workload for  border-control officers and increasing difficulties in developing planes and passengers  risk assessments. In addition, the EU continues to receive a  high number of asylum seekers. A substantial number of economic migrants appear  to use the asylum procedure to try entering  or staying on the territory of the EU. Their  first interlocutors are often border-control  authorities. Increased abuse of  fraudulent breeder*  documents Given the increasing level of security features  in modern travel documents and stricter migration policies across Member States, the  misuse of genuine travel documents (which  includes impersonation and fraudulently obtained documents) is likely to be an entry  method which will steadily rise. Some of these issues will be addressed by the  Visa Information System (VIS), which is operational and used by issuing authorities in 11 regions as of November 2013, and will be rolled  out to additional regions in 2014 and 2015. The systematic check on arrivals of VIS visas is likely to result in increased abuse of  fraudulent breeder documents required to  obtain genuine VIS, as well as EU passports  which do not require systematic biometric  controls at the border. In addition, the use  of specific fraudulent techniques to fool biometric checks, like spoofed fingerprints, is  also likely to increase. Movement of terrorists Overall, there is an underlying threat of terrorism-related travel movements especially  due to the appeal of the Syrian conflict to  both idealist and radicalised youths. The  conflict in Syria has attracted thousands of  foreign fighters, including EU citizens, dualnationality holders and other third-country nationals. Turkey has become the country most often  used by foreign fighters to enter or exit Syria  primarily because of its geographical location plus the availability of legal and cheap  travel options. It is possible that foreign fighters use irregular  migration routes and/or facilitation networks  (irrespective of whether this is recommended  by terrorist structures or not), especially when  the associated risks and costs are perceived  as low in comparison to legal travel options. Frontex is not in a position to identify, nor  does it have any information that suggests,  any nexus between terrorist travel and irregular migration routings and/or facilitation  networks. Nonetheless, it cannot be excluded  that EU-based fighters change their modi operandi of travel when faced with administrative and/or legal measures upon their return;  or that may be reluctant to return home in  fear of reprisal, which may induce them to  resettle elsewhere. Health risk assessment The main focus of Frontex is on strengthening border-control cooperation to facilitate  bona fide migration management, combat  cross-border crime and prevent threats to  the Member States. This includes the prevention of threats to public health, as defined  by the International Health Regulations of  the World Health Organization. For the first  time, the Annual Risk Analysis 2015 presents  the WHO Regional Office for Europe’s review of the potential public health risks associated with the migration phenomena and  ways to adequately address them, prepared  under the project ‘Public Health Aspects of  Migration in Europe’ (PHAME). As human mobility in Europe rises, health  security attracts increasing attention as  a means of safeguarding the health of the  population. Health security has been traditionally considered a domestic concern.  However, the public health challenges of human mobility and large migration have been  as well recognised as foreign policy matters,  claiming for a need of international cooperation to safeguard public health as a global  common good. The analysis of health risks  requires an overview of the health hazards  arising in the countries of origin and transit, at the border and within the countries  of destination. Migrants are exposed to a number of different health risks during the migration process.  However, the impact of the journey varies  depending on the category of the migrant,  undocumented migrants being among the  most vulnerable given the often harsh conditions of the journey and the limited access  to health services. The following analysis,  therefore, focuses on undocumented migration. The public health aspects of migration  affect both health care and non-health care  workers involved in the various stages of the  migration process, as well as resident communities. In the countries of destination, migration often streches the capacity of health  care systems to adapt to the additional demand for health services, and the unfamiliar and changing health profiles and needs.  Due to the common lack of proper preparation and information, the health risks posed  by migrants are often overestimated by the  receiving communities. Migrants Pre-departure The risk of acquiring vaccine-preventable diseases depends on the presence of susceptible  individuals in the population and their epidemiological profile. In many countries of origin and transit the health care systems are  weakened by civil unrest, wars, economic  crisis and natural disasters. The provision of  public health services including vaccination  to the population is often interrupted or even  withheld, resulting in a dramatic reduction  of the immunisation coverage. For instance,  in the Syrian Arab Republic, the immunisation coverage has fallen from 91% registered  in 2011 to 68% in 2012. Although efforts have  been made to improve immunisation coverage, there are still deep concerns on the immunisation status of Syrians, including those  asking for asylum in European countries. In countries with high tuberculosis (TB) incidence and prevalence, large portions of the  population have a status of latent TB infection that can be developed to TB disease, often contagious, in case of decreased immune  response. Such situation may be created by  the hard conditions of a journey which may  start before crossing the border of the country of destination. Travel and transit Health risks at this phase vary depending on  the conditions and duration of the travel. The  conditions to which migrants are exposed to  during the journey as well as in the countries  of destination put them at risk of sexual victimisation, violence and sexual ill-health. Refugees, asylum seekers and undocumented  migrants, especially women, infants and children, were identified as the most vulnerable  ones. Other risks arising throughout the journey and specially during rescue operations  include drowning, traumatism, burns, hypothermia, dehydration, heatstroke, foodborne  diseases, respiratory and skin infections. Host community At reception centres, overcrowding and inadequate hygiene and sanitary conditions coupled with limited access to health care are  well known risk factors for acquiring a variety of communicable diseases. The risk of  measles, diphtheria and whooping cough is  enhanced in the presence of susceptible individuals. Furthermore, scarce hygiene and  sanitary conditions increase the risk of gastro-intestinal and skin infections. Mental health disorders and chronic diseases  can be left undiagnosed and untreated, leading to further deterioration of the health  condition of the migrants, even after reaching their destination. Even if chronic diseases  are detected during the first screening procedures, lack of communication between reception centres where migrants are transferred  to may cause the suspension of treatments  with serious consequences. Potentially long  and unspecified periods of stay, unclear legal  status, communication difficulties and pasttraumatic experiences expose the migrants  to mental health risks. Social, economic and political factors in origin and destination countries influence the  risk of HIV infection of migrants. Isolation and  stress may lead migrants to engage in behaviours – such as unsafe casual or commercial  sex and drug use – which increase HIV risk.  This risk is exacerbated by inadequate access  to HIV services and fear of being stigmatised  for seeking HIV-related information or support. Female migrants may be particularly  vulnerable to HIV and susceptible to exploitation and/or physical and sexual violence. Migrants in a vulnerable situation may experience poor housing and working conditions,  as well as limited access to health services,  which may cause TB infection or the reactivation of a previous TB infection into disease.  Same conditions can be cause of delays in diagnosis and premature interruptions of their  treatment, which eventually could develop  into a multi-drug resistent form of TB. Proper  education and complete access to culturalsensitive quality and supportive services are  of paramount importance. 5.5.2. Workforce at the border and in  the reception centres Health risks for health and non-health workforce vary depending on the resistance and  vulnerability of each individual, the working  conditions as well as the potential exposure  to biological agents. Rescuers may be exposed  to trauma, injuries, hypothermia, drowning  and heatstroke during rescue operations. Due  to their difficult working conditions, psychological support to the workers both at the  border and in the migration centres is also  relevant. Adequate screening procedures focused on communicable, non-communicable  diseases as well as mental health should be  performed when required and with full respect to human rights. In an EU migration environment characterised by increasing pressures at the borders  coupled with often decreasing resources for  their handling, the challenge for border-control authorities is to become more effective  and efficient whilst maintaining the necessary  quality standards. Risk analysis must then be  able to provide both shortand longer-term  recommendations for decision makers. The  following chapter provides a concise description of a selection of areas where risk mitigation initiatives could take place. Clearly there  exist many areas where this could be recommended but the following chapter consists of  one selection of issues identified and chosen  on the basis of the Frontex risk analysis carried out throughout this year. The objective  of this chapter is to ensure high-level awareness of selected areas for potential action and  can serve as a practical example of how to  follow on from risk analysis into corresponding risk mitigation decisions. Security aspects of border  management Given the threats visible at the external borders of the EU, it is evident that border management has an important security  component. Indeed, according to the Schengen Borders Code, officials at the borders are  charged with helping to ‘combat illegal immigration and trafficking in human beings  and to prevent any threat to the Member  States’ internal security’.* However, in view  of the increasing security threats witnessed  at the external borders during the past year,  it is necessary to further clarify the role of,  and tools available to border management  authorities in this area. What useful function can be played by the  border authorities in the area of counter-terrorism or combatting smuggling of weapons  for instance? The threat of terrorist activities and the methods of entry into the EU  have been much discussed during the past  year due to several incidents which occurred  within the EU in 2014 and early 2015. Delineating the tasks and the potential tools of  those working at the borders in helping to  combat this threat is an important discussion  which should be undertaken. Given that 2015  will also be the year in which the EU renews  and updates the EU Internal Security Strategy and the European Commission will adopt  a European Agenda on Security, this discussion would also be very appropriately timed. Certain cross-border crimes, such as trafficking in human beings, and the role to be played  by border authorities in tackling them have  been well addressed. Other areas could also  benefit from further attention, for instance  in the fight against smuggling of firearms and  ammunition into the EU. Taking into account  the dual circumstances of larger passenger  flows at the borders and an increasing threat  of small amounts of firearms and ammunition  being smuggled by individuals, rather than  as part of dedicated and larger shipments, it  is clear that this represents an increasingly  challenging phenomena for border guards  to handle. There is a need then to address  border management’s function in thwarting these criminal ambitions and preventing  an increasing numbers of illicit firearms, its  parts and ammunition from entering the EU. With the above issues in mind, specialised  and integrated trainings across the EU and  improved intelligence gathering and analysis  would certainly help to provide for stronger  cross-border crime prevention and detection.  A stronger emphasis could be placed on increasing risk analysis capacities at a national  Selected recommendations  level. This could then be employed in, for instance, developing risk profiles of potential  offenders and assessing passenger information. Improved knowledge on the security  threats faced at the borders with information  on the modalities, actions, and the modi operandi typically employed at the borders by  offenders could all prove useful additions to  the border control authorities’ cross-border  crime tackling toolkit. These measures would  all fall under the broader umbrella exercise  of better defining and designing the security  aspect of border management.  Full identification of  individuals entering the EU As previous chapters have discussed, 2014  saw increased arrivals at the external borders  of the EU, often in large, mixed and sometimes overwhelming influxes at particular  borders. The corollary of this was the strain  placed on border control authorities which  left them with fewer resources available for  identifying those attempting to enter the  EU. This then resulted in some of the figures  seen in the past year, where high numbers  of entrants were not attributed a nationality. Pressures faced at a border can also lead  to increases in the phenomenon of nationality swapping for the purposes fraudulent  entry to the EU. Additionally it is an obligation stemming from the Schengen Borders  Code that entrants must have their nationalities identified. The importance of this issue is two-fold; there  is both a humanitarian and a security rationale. Firstly, granting international protection  to those in need is a legal obligation. Hence  why there is a strong need to ensure the correct and full identification of those arriving  at the borders so as to provide the full necessary protection, where required. Secondly,  the identification issue concerns the potential  threat to internal security. With large numbers of arrivals remaining essentially unclassified for a variety of reasons – false or lack  of identification documents, concerns over  the validity of a claimed nationality etc. –  there is clearly a risk that persons representing a security threat enter the EU. However,  the challenge for the border guard is clear:  how to differentiate for example, between  the asylum seeker who arrives at the external border with no papers and the economic  migrant or a migrant who might pose a security threat attempting to abuse the system  by claiming a false nationality? This difficulty  is clearly exacerbated in situations of intense  migratory pressure. It is clear that in response to these challenges, greater emphasis must be placed on  increased screening and debriefing teams.  Second-line checks on arrivals are a crucial  step in the identification process. They also  provide an important source of information  which can be further used for intelligence and  risk analysis purposes. Improving intelligence  and analytical capacities are thus also of great  importance. The development of risk profiles  of arrivals and training for border guards involved in these areas would also help to ensure greater identification. Knowledge management  at operational and policy  levels One improvement which has been evident  in the preceding years has been the increasing sources of information and data from  the external borders. Information is key to  situational monitoring and for analytical  purposes and so the improved availability  of information is of significant importance.  However, with greater information comes  a greater challenge in effectively utilising it.  This is especially the case in emergency situations when large amounts of information  are available but time is scarce. It is in this  context that data and situational information is sometimes not enough, but authorities will require the analysis and intelligence  derived from it to make the fully informed  decisions. The management of this knowledge process is critical. Methods for ensuring that the available and  appropriate information reaches the authorities must be assured and must also be able to  perform even in the context of time pressure.  The cycle of information is an essential process for informed decision making: Ensuring  that reliable and stable information from the  screeners, debriefers and all those working on  the front line is efficiently extracted and then  analysed by the analytical services and transformed into workable and relevant knowledge  for onward and timely transmission to decision makers is crucial. This process supposes  the existence of capable analytical services  and timely data collection. Also important in  this regard is an exchange and sharing ‘culture’, where relevant information is transmitted amongst differing national and EU services.  Another aspect of this issue can be seen at  a higher policy level. It is still unclear how to  transfer sufficient and relevant information  and knowledge from border management  into the articulation of informed and coherent  migration policies. The knowledge gained by  border management officials, from the bottom up, should help feed into the devising of  the higher level strategic policies taken at national and EU level. The analysis and intelligence should be a constant and reliable source  when deciding on the future approaches in  the area of migration management.  Specific third-country  border management and  border security risks Building relations with countries outside the  EU represents a very important method for  effectively tackling irregular migration and  cross-border crime and forms an important  part of the EU’s Integrated Border Management (IBM) concept. Operational cooperation, regional capacity building projects and  information exchange have all been of huge  importance in ensuring efficient and effective border control systems for both the EU  Member States and their counterparts. However, in these relations there has, at times,  been a tendency to address the risks that the  third countries’ border management circumstances represent to the EU borders. For instance, the focus might be overly placed on  the third countries’ weak capacities, porous  borders and population movements. It is a legitimate concern but it also can lead to a lack  of incentive for third countries to cooperate if  the approach is too EU-centric. The approach  could be more focused on directly benefitting  the specific border related needs of those third  countries. The consequence of this would be  to assist in improving and enhancing their  border management in relation to the threats  and needs of these third countries.  Identifying the risks faced by third-country  partners in terms of their border management and border security concerns, and then  recommending local and regional actions for  risk mitigation would then likely cascade and  spread out to create reciprocal positive benefits for the EU borders. It would also help to  ensure increased incentive for cooperation  with the EU. This could be achieved through  targeted capability building and technical assistance projects in third countries, based on a  national appreciation of risk, which would aim  to strengthen third-country migration management capacities, whilst, all the while, still  imparting EU border management standards.  As an initial proposal, Turkey would appear  to be a reasonable candidate with whom to  implement this working method of increased  and targeted cooperation. This does not preclude the necessity to cooperate with other  countries of origin and transit who play important roles and are crucial partners in the  EU neighbourhood. Multidisciplinary  integrated training for EU  border-control authorities It has been seen in this year’s Annual Risk  Analysis that the geopolitical environment  surrounding the EU is becoming ever more  complex. Given the proximity of conflict areas to the external borders of the EU, there  is no doubt that the threat level to EU border security increases. With the situations  in certain neighbouring countries constantly  evolving, sometimes for the worse, so too the  nature of the challenge for border authorities proves to be constantly shifting. This can  be seen also in the sudden influxes faced at  the external borders which have proved difficult to predict and thus, demand an effective and timely response. It can be a challenge  to provide for the continuous functioning of  border-control activities in a situation where  thousands of migrants, of mixed backgrounds,  circumstances and nationalities, arrive at the  border in a very short space of time. It implies a certain level of inherent risk and vulnerability at the external borders. In response to constantly evolving location  and scale of the threats witnessed, the authorities at the borders must have a capability for risk mitigation during moments  of emergency. Often the response in such  situations calls for intensified interagency  cooperation. This is an important tool for  responding when a particular border is under an inordinate strain. The difficulty that  this method presents though is that the officials tasked with working in closer collaboration, whether they are from customs,  security services, asylum authorities, or indeed border guards, are not trained to know  the work of the other. The border guard will  likely not have the necessary knowledge of  the customs official’s functions and likewise,  the police officer will not know all the procedures of the asylum official’s work – and  vice versa. This can lead to misunderstandings, difficulties and delays when these authorities are required to assist one another  during crises. When time is of the essence,  and a potential humanitarian crisis is unfolding, processes must be as streamlined and as  dependable as possible. A potential mitigation for this issue could  be to complement interagency cooperation  through an integrated multidisciplinary training. An integrated training for all officials  working at the borders would aim to provide  them with the skills found in one another’s  respective disciplines. This could comprise  of specialised courses to enable those undertaking them to gain a knowledge of the  processes behind the work of their counterparts in the field. Ensuring that a border guard  would be well versed in the work of a lawenforcement security officer, and have a secure grasp of the issues going into the fight  against smuggling of weapons, for instance,  would ensure that in his own work he could  contribute to the work of the other. A better  understanding of the needs of the other authorities in the field would certainly lead to  an enhanced interagency cooperation which  could help to mitigate the threat arising during emergencies at the borders.